{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1046\deflangfe1046{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f233\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f234\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\f236\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f237\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f238\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f239\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}
{\f240\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;\red153\green153\blue153;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\qc \li0\ri0\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\i\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\qc \li0\ri0\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx311\tx663\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \i\fs36\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\qj \li0\ri0\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\s4\qc \li0\ri0\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 4;}{\s5\qc \li0\ri0\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 5;}{
\s6\qc \li0\ri0\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs36\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 6;}{\s7\qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs40\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 7;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\qj \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 
\sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}{\s16\qj \li284\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx328\tx708\faauto\rin0\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext16 Body Text 2;}{\s17\qj \li426\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext17 Body Text Indent 2;}{\s18\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext18 
Body Text Indent 3;}{\*\cs19 \additive \ul\cf2 \sbasedon10 Hyperlink;}{\s20\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext20 footnote text;}{\*\cs21 
\additive \super \sbasedon10 footnote reference;}{\s22\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4419\tqr\tx8838\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext22 footer;}{\*\cs23 \additive 
\sbasedon10 page number;}{\s24\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4419\tqr\tx8838\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext24 header;}}{\info
{\author Um usu\'e1rio do Microsoft Office satisfeito}{\operator Um usu\'e1rio do Microsoft Office satisfeito}{\creatim\yr2001\mo2\dy21\hr12\min26}{\revtim\yr2001\mo3\dy5\hr15\min49}{\version31}{\edmins680}{\nofpages39}{\nofwords20443}{\nofchars116528}
{\*\company Instituto Fernand Braudel}{\nofcharsws143104}{\vern8249}}\paperw11907\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1418\margb1418 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3\jcompress\viewkind1\viewscale100\nolnhtadjtbl \fet0\sectd 
\psz9\sbkcol\linex0\headery1440\titlepg\sectdefaultcl {\footer \pard\plain \s22\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4419\tqr\tx8838\pvpara\phmrg\posxr\posy0\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs23 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs23\lang1024\langfe1024\noproof 39}}}{\cs23 
\par }\pard \s22\ql \li0\ri360\widctlpar\tqc\tx4419\tqr\tx8838\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin360\lin0\itap0 {\cf17\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The Master is Dead
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx1621\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\fs56\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Peru:
\par }\pard\plain \s7\qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\outlinelevel6\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs40\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {\fs56 The Master Is Dead
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 By Norman Gall 
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  HYPERLINK "http://www.normangall.com" }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b0200000017000000130000007700770077002e006e006f0072006d0061006e00670061006c006c002e0063006f006d000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b3600000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e006e006f0072006d0061006e00670061006c00
6c002e0063006f006d002f000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs19\ul\cf2\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 www.normangall.com}}}{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  - }{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  HYPERLINK "http://www.braudel.org.br" }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b0200000017000000130000007700770077002e006200720061007500640065006c002e006f00720067002e00620072000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b3600000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e006200720061007500640065006c002e006f00
720067002e00620072002f000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs19\ul\cf2\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 www.braudel.org.br}}}{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  - ngall@braudel.org.br
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs40\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 He commanded respect, despite his old-fashioned and dirty appear
ance. The principal personages of Cuzco greeted him seriously. It was uncomfortable to walk with him because he kneeled down before all the churches and chapels and ostentatiously took off his hat to every priest he met. My father hated him; he had worked
 as a scribe in the Old Man\rquote s haciendas. \'93
From the hilltops he shouts with the voice of damnation, warning his Indians that he is everywhere. He harvests his vegetables, and then lets them rot; he thinks they are too cheap to sell in the cities, and too dea
r to be eaten by his serfs. He will go to Hell,\'94 my father said of him. 
\par 
\par }\pard \qr \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx2443\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1034\langfe1046\langnp1034 \emdash JOSE MAR\'cdA ARGUEDAS, }{\i\lang1034\langfe1046\langnp1034 Los R\'edos Profundos.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx2443\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\lang1034\langfe1046\langnp1034 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 THE HACIENDA LAURAMARCA\emdash the larg\-est estate in the Department of Cuzco, ancient seat of the Inca Empire\emdash 
is a gray-green feudal domain stretching over 200,000 acres of rolling, windy }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 puna }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 of grass and stubble and glacial stone in the high\-
lands of southern Peru, occupied by immense herds of sheep, llamas, and alpacas, and roughly 5,000 Indian serfs. There is a pri\-meval and intricate confusion of stone fences, defining each of the Indians\rquote 
 tiny subsistence plots, alongside the small river dividing the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 puna }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
as the steppe reaches gradually toward the white slopes of Mount Ausanccate. In The old days the Indians were regularly sent to fetch snow f
rom the great mountain, 21,000 feet high, and carry it on their backs to the hacienda, wrapped in burlap and straw, to be made into ice cream and sold for the master\rquote s profit in the Sunday peasant market at the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
casa grande }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 of Lauramarca. In the cold and darkness of sagging adobe huts cradled among their sheep pens and potato patches, the Indians tell stories of bloodshed and re\-
bellion that won a certain fame throughout Peru for the Hacienda Lauramarca as a sym\-bol of the struggle that led to the abolition of Indian serfdom and to the end of the haci\-
enda system itself. For this reason, it was the first hacienda in the Andes expropriated in the sweeping agrarian reform now being carried out by Peru\rquote s \'93Revolutionary govern\-ment\'94 of generals and colonels. The 
end of feudal bondage is the wellspring of the con\-vulsive social changes that have now launched Peru into the most stunning and confused outbreak of reforms Latin America has seen since the early years of the Cuban Revolution.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 One of the stories told by the Indians con\-cerns the long ago murder of a }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 hacendado, }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 or master, of the Hacienda Lauramarca dur\-ing a dispute with the neighboring town of Ocongate over the hacienda\rquote s traditional monopoly of the trade with its serfs. The town was a settlement of white
washed mud houses occupied by half-breed merchants and petty officials who prospered from buying stolen sheep and from other forbidden traffic with the Indians, which emboldened them to agitate for transfer of the region\rquote 
s weekly peasant market from the hacienda to the town plaza. The }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 hacendado }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 was a lean, dour, imperious priest, Padre Hilario Antonio Sal\-divar, known for his black cassock and flow\-
ing hair and for assembling his serfs each Sunday at dawn in the chapel of the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 casa grande }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 to hear him intone 
the Latin mass, for which they paid him a fee in sheep. The Indians cringed in church as in the world, and brought the master-priest many gifts. The chapel reeked of piss, and its cherished oil paintings\emdash done by wandering artists cen\-turies ago
\emdash were so badly damaged by the rains penetrating the chapel\rquote s tile roof, and so dim and primitive in their religious con\-ception, that they appeared to have been made in the first strokes of a blighted Crea\-
tion. On feast days the Indians filed into the chapel in glowi
ng shawls and ponchos, wine-colored and cunningly woven with designs copying the plumage of the Inca crown; there was a squeaky orchestra of home-made flutes, harps, and violins that accompanied the mass recited by the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
cura }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Saldivar in a language in\-comprehensible to the Indians. The orchestra produced its traditional music with a devout and incandescent mysticism, and the Indian harpist played, as always, with his eyes closed.
\par 
\par At dawn on February 8, 1899, the towns\-people of Ocongate crossed the small, misty river swollen by heavy rains to attack the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 casa grande }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 of Lauramarca. On the night be\-
fore the attack, the mayor and other town notables crossed over to the hacienda to sell }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 aguardiente\emdash a }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 crude and powerful sugar-based liquor\emdash to the Indians on the eve 
of the Lenten carnival. The attack came after the mayor of Ocongate was captured and marched shoeless to the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 casa grande, a }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
fortress-like adobe compound encircled by walled stockyards and a few withered euca\-lyptus trees, which the Saldivars had owned for 
generations. Two Indians were killed while trying to stop the mob from breaking down the great door of the manor house; the townspeople rammed their way into the stone-paved interior patio and sacked the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 casa grande, }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 leading away sheep and horses and alpacas, and carrying off stores of barley and }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 aguardiente. }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 When Padre Hilario An\-
tonio Saldivar appeared at a window to speak to the mob, he was blasted with buckshot and died a few days later. \'93The Indians could not have done this, for they thought the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cura }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 S
aldivar was something like a god,\'94 an old peasant told me in Quechua, the ancient Andean vernacular. \'93When the people of Ocongate shot him, some of us carried the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cura }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
over the mountains on a sheepskin litter for two days and two nights to Cuzco to try to save his life. He died just a few miles from Cuzco, and gave a curse with his last words. Before the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cura }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Saldivar gave his curse, our potatoes grew the size of melons. But now they grow hard and small.\'94
\par 
\par The uprising of the people of Ocongate in 1899\emdash the weekly market was moved from the hacienda to the town not long after the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cura\rquote s }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 death\emdash 
was an augury of the swift and sometimes violent changes that Peru has been experiencing in this century. Conflicts like these accompanied the rise of merchant towns in E
urope during the Middle Ages, and helped drag these feudal societies into the modern world. The modernization of Peru has generated immense social pressures leading to the blizzard of decrees of the \'93Revolutionary government\'94
 that have been descending over Peru since the armed forces seized power two years ago. The townspeo\-ple of Ocongate are }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizos }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 and }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cholos }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 (In\-dian converts to Hispanic culture), and their triumph over the traditional power of the hacienda is part of the great political and cultural mutations now changing Peru: the increasing political power of the }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 ma\-jority in the towns and cities, and what so\-ciologists call the \'93cholofication\'94 of the In\-dians. The new social conscience of the largely }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 officer corps of the Peruvian army, long known as \'93the watchdog of the oligarchy,\'94
 became a guiding force after the army was forced to deal with a series of peasant and guerrilla uprisings in the Andes during the 1960s.
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {
\par The army\rquote s recent decision to seize power and guide Peru toward \'93revolutionary\'94 solu\-tions came essentially from a military intel\-ligence operation that grew like Topsy while combating three tiny\emdash and overpublicized\emdash 
 guerrilla movements along the eastern slopes of the Andes. The mushrooming counterin\-surgency operation\emdash led mostly by officers trained at U.S. and French intelligence and antiguerrilla schools\emdash 
mounted a military spying apparatus that penetrated not only the centers of rebellion in the universities and the countryside, but Peru\rquote s business establish\-ment and tradi
tional political parties as well; these officers later explained that they found the existing structure so rotten that it might dissolve into violence and chaos if there were no drastic reforms. Since executing their bloodless coup d\rquote \'e9
tat at 5 A.M. on October 3, 1968, these officers have decreed new laws placing the main sectors of the Peruvian economy\emdash the banks, the press, the mining, petroleum, fishing, and sugar industries\emdash 
 under state ownership or control. Among all these measures, however, the \'93Revolutionary government\'94 has staked the greatest part of its prestige and effort in executing the most radical land reform program of the past decade in Latin America.

\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par On June 24, 1969, President Juan Velasco Alvarado, who was the army commander at the time of 
the coup, appeared on nationwide radio and television for a historic speech, announcing that today the Government of the People and the Armed Forces put in motion a vigorous and irreversible process of national transforma\-
tion, thus avoiding the chaotic outbreak of social violence and giving autonomous solu\-tions to the age-old problems of Peru\'85. Today, the Day of the Indian, the Revolu\-tionary government presents the peasant with the best of tributes, \'85
 a law that will end for all time an unjust social order that has maintained in poverty and iniquity those who have always had to till someone else\rquote s land, a social order that has always denied this land to millions of }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 campesinos}{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  \'85.To these men of the land we can now say in the immortal and libertarian words of Tupac Amaru [leader of the great 18th-century Indian rebellions that swept across the high
\-lands of Peru and Bolivia]: }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93Campesino, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 the master will no longer feed on your poverty.\'94
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 I
\par }\pard\plain \s2\qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx311\tx663\faauto\outlinelevel1\rin0\lin0\itap0 \i\fs36\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Mancha Ind\'edgena
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\tx663\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  \'93EL PATR\'d3N HA MUERTO,\'94 Sixto Flores told me as we traveled across the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 puna }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
on two skinny horses after the Hacienda Lauramarca was expropriated last year. \'93The master is dead. The agrarian reform has come in his place.\'94
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Sixto Flores Yucra, 41, is a veteran of the Peruvian army and, thus, one of the few In\-
dians on the hacienda who can speak Spanish, though he can decipher a newspaper or a legal document only haltingly and painfully. (Most of the people of the Andean area known as the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mancha indigena, }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 or Indian oil stain, are illiterate and speak only Quechu
a, which in its many local dialects is still the vernacular in most of the highlands of Pew, Bolivia, and Ecuador.) Sixto is an affable man with strong, supple features suggesting a mixture of Indian blood with that of the African slaves brought to Cuzco 
t
hree centuries ago. it is a strange face; elongated, with a broad, relaxed mouth and gentle brown eyes awakening, when roused, into quick anguish and the focusing of an acute rustic intelligence. He dresses like most Indians, in a heavy brown poncho, a br
oad-brimmed hat, and sandals cut from old rubber tires; he is the living image of the Indian awakening to the modem world. 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 After learning to speak Spanish as an army recruit 20 years ago\emdash the immemorial way of obtaining recruits is for the army to sur\-roun
d an Indian village, herd all eligible youth into a truck and drive away\emdash Sixto Flores three times has been elected }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 personero }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
(headman) of his community. He also has been a lay catechist of the Catholic faith, a leader of the peasant }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sindicato }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 organized on 
the hacienda in 1957 with help from the Communist leaders of the Cuzco Workers Federation and, now, president of the co\-operative that the Ministry of Agriculture has organized among the hacienda\rquote s 975}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Indian families. Since the cooperative was formed last
 year, Sixto has been traveling back and forth from Cuzco, lobbying in The offices of the Ministry of Agriculture there and buying expensive breeding animals for the cooper\-ative with a loan from the Agricultural Bank, as well as rice, canned goods, and 
}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 coca}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 for the co-op store that has replaced the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cholo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 merchant\rquote 
s roadside establishment at the hacienda\rquote s entrance. For his trips to Cuzco, Sixto has been paid 75}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
cents a day in expenses, and has spent his nights on a sheepskin in the Ministry of Agriculture garage, where a former Lauramarca peasant works as watch\-man. \'93
Last month at the agricultural fair in Cuzco I lost my hat while buying six prize bulls for the cooperative,\'94 Sixto told me.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93Because of the cooperative I haven\rquote t har\-vested my own potatoes. W
hen I came home from Cuzco without my hat, my wife and mother-in-law said I had been drunk and sleeping with whores.\'94
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 When the Hacienda Lauramarca was ex\-propriated last year, its serfs had been on strike for nearly half a century. In 1922 this strike, or \'93
campaign of disobedience,\'94 began after the government of Dictator Augusto B. Legu\'eda (1919\emdash 30) rejected the Indians\rquote  pe\-tition that their feudal obligations be abol\-ished. In 1926 the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cura }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Saldivar\rquote s nephew, an influential member of the dictator\rquote s party, had army troops sent to the hacienda to crush the serfs\rquote  \'93campaign of disobedience.\'94
 The troops were attacked by the Indians with slingshots, a tactic used in the peasant land invasions of the 1960s. According to an of\-ficial report made after the Legu\'eda dictator\-ship was overthrown, the army then 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li284\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin284\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 committed all crimes it was possible to imagine against the defenseless Indians. In frightful succession they effected rape, beat\-
ings, and burnings of the Indians\rquote  wretched huts. In a word, the inhabitants of Laura\-marca suffered the effects of a true armed invasion. As an epilogue, several Indians (named in the report) were separated from \lquote 
their families and deported to the jungle area of Ccos\'f1ipata, where they still remain.\'94 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {All the deportees eventually died
 in the jungle, but the revolutionary strike of the Lauramarca serfs remained in effect. It was this kind of repression that earned the Peru\-vian army its notoriety as \'93watchdog of the oligarchy.\'94
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par When I first visited the Hacienda Laura\-marca, a few weeks after its expropriation, an old }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 campesino }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
named Mariano Mamani gave me a copy of a list of feudal obligations published in a Lima newspaper in 1931 when he and some other serfs had traveled to Lima to seek relief from the government. It is a good example 
of the kind of servitude prevailing in the sierra until the 1960s.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\tx788\tx1116\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 a)\tab we performed obligatory service as }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 pongos }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
(unpaid household servants) to the master and his relatives; b) each month we were sent to Cuzco in groups of 30, where we were rented out to different homes with\-out being paid a cent, eating only }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 coca }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 and scraps from the master\rquote s table; c) an equal number of us were sent every 40 days to the malaria-ridden valley of Marcapata to work the master\rquote s hacienda there, being paid 20 cents a day; d) we
 performed the farm labor of the hacienda and pastured the master\rquote s animals, paying double the value of any animal that should die by sickness or acci\-dent; e) carrying the hacienda\rquote 
s produce to the cities of Cuzco and Sicuani, using our own pack animals on journeys of 10, 15, and 20 days, being paid five cents for each ton of wool or potatoes delivered; f) the obliga\-
tion to sell all our produce to the master at ridiculous prices, like eight cents for a sheep or 16 cents for a baby bull; g) at each annual }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 rodeo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 (roundup) we had to deliver five per\-
cent of our animals to the master without payment; h) beyond these exactions and robberies there was the physical punishment for infractions of these rules, such as being hanged by our fingers from a rafter of the master\rquote s house and to be whipped.

\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The legal theory behind these obligations was payment in goods and services for the right to live on the master\rquote 
s land, stolen from the Indians over the past four centuries.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 A second invasion of Lauramarca, this time by 
the rural police, came shortly after the delegation of Indians returned from Lima. Two peasants were killed and the Indians\rquote 
 herds confiscated after the Saldivar family and the prefect of Cuzco agreed to share the proceeds of the rent collection drive whic
h greatly exceeded the value of the unpaid feudal dues. In the late 1930s the Saldivars brought the archbishop of Lima, Pedro Pascual Farf\'e1n, on a long, dusty trip to the Hacienda Lauramarca to attempt a recon\-
ciliation with the Indians. It was Archbishop Farf\'e1n who, around that time, issued a widely quoted pastoral letter that said:
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93
Poverty is the most certain road to eternal felicity. Only the state which succeeds in making the poor appreciate the spiritual treasures of poverty can solve its social prob\-lems.\'94 The attempt at reconciliation failed.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 In 1952 the Hacienda Lauramarca was bought by a group of Argentine sheepmen who attempted a classic land enclosure move\-
ment to recover the pastures that had been invaded and occupied by the Indians for three d
ecades. The majordomos would build fences by day and the Indians would tear them down by night and steal the purebred sheep that the Argentines had bought as breeding stock. When several Indians were arrested, a delegation of peasants traveled to Cuzco to
 seek help from the regional labor federation, which promptly assigned two lawyers to assist the Indians. In 1957 the labor federation organized the first peasant }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sindicato }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
in the sierra among the serfs of Lauramarca. \'93The Argentines never made a profit on the hacienda,\'94 the last manager of Lauramarca told me. \'93
Under the previous government, we went to Lima to ask that the hacienda be expropriated, but the old land reform agency refused.\'94 The formation of the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sindicato }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
at Lauramarca was the beginning of a series of uprisings in the sierra of central and southern Peru in the 1950s and 1960s of some 300,000 peasants in haciendas and Indian communities that brought both mili\-tary repression and a series of reform mea\-
sures, each bolder than the last, leading to the destruction of the agrarian feudalism of the past. The master is dead, yet no one knows what will come in his place. 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {Peasant Life in the Sierra
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 THE HOUSE of Sixto Flores Yucra is at the top of a remote valley more than 13,000 feet high, very near th
e snow line, at the edge of the closed universe that for centuries was the Hacienda Lauramarca and on which Western culture still has made only a dim and fragmented impression. In Sixto\rquote s }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 ayllu, }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 or Indian community, more than 100 varieties of potato are grown; the area is one of the centers where the potato was domesticated in pre-Columbian America. The 30 }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 comu\-neros }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 rotate the tiny potato patches among themselves each year to ensure that no one permanently uses better or worse land than the rest, a practice dating from Inca times that has died out in most of the sierra.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 I came to Sixto\rquote s house in July, the season of sunny days and frigid nights and brilliant skies, the season when potatoes are harvested and }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 chu\'f1o }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 is made. }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Chu\'f1o }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 means potatoes that survive t
he early frosts, dug from the ground and spread out under the July moon to freeze,~ then crushed under The feet of the peasant and his family as the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 chu\'f1o }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
melts in the afternoon sun; this is done several times until the potato is completely dehydrated, and
 all that is left is a small, bitter black ball that does not rot with time. In all the thatched adobe huts that follow the rusted glacial valleys down from the slopes of Mount Ausanccate, }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 chu\'f1o }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 is the main food for most of the year. \'93All our meals are potato or }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 chu\'f1o, chu\'f1o }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 or potato,\'94
 Sixto told me one night over a bowl of potato soup. \'93Potatoes have a sweeter taste, but they can only be stored for half a year before they rot.\'94 In the field below his house, Sixto and his family harvest potatoes until nigh
tfall, until the whole valley is suddenly bathed in amber light and then, just as suddenly, left in pri\-
meval darkness and cold. Light and warmth are precious commodities; the family works through the day intensely and with little talk. Sixto wears a brigh
t red homespun vest with a high collar and a white felt hat; his wife Vicintina, whom he brought here over the mountains from the Vilcanota valley 15 years ago, is a strong, bright-eyed woman with ashen feet, wearing the traditional black homespun skirt a
nd embroidered red jacket and canopy hat, with sodden hands working swiftly, excavating and sorting potatoes, some for }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 chu\'f1o }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
and some for eating as they are, placing them in different striped bags of finely woven alpaca that are brought to the high sierra by the Indians who make them near the coast. \'93The potatoes are smaller this year because of the hail and the frost,\'94
 Sixto said; the harvested potatoes were gathered in small piles and covered with straw, and a small cross was planted on top to keep witches
 from cursing the potatoes. He keeps a small flock of sheep and alpacas, but these animals are very rarely slaughtered. They are eaten when they die of sickness or old age, and their wool barely meets the family\rquote 
s needs for yarn to make their garments. Even the guinea pigs that scurry in the darkness of Sixto\rquote s hovel are cooked only on very special occasions.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Sixto inherited his father\rquote 
s house high in the valley, where there was enough space to pasture his small flock in relative freedom from the majordomos of the hacienda. Never\-
theless, he cultivates three separate plots at different altitudes as insurance against his whole potato crop being destroyed by a single night\rquote s frost. The family lives in a compound of four adobe huts with a cold mountain stream r
unning through the interior patio. The main structure is a cooking house that is filled with smoke at mealtimes, since there is no chimney. Sixto\rquote 
s precious guinea pigs flee and scream on the earthen floor beneath the old hand loom on which the family\rquote s cl
othing is woven, and among the primitive farm tools and grinding stones and the brightly colored plastic pails and basins bought at the Sunday market in Ocongate.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 For the evening meal the family is ranged along one wall, whispering curtly in Quechua, a man
 and four children waiting to be fed in near-darkness as Sixto\rquote 
s wife and mother-in-law fuss and bend over clay pots in a corner next to the small fire fueled with the dried dung of alpacas and sheep that is carefully stored in the yard. The fire glares wh
en stirred, and throws a long shadow from the Incaic hand-plow, the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 chaquitaccla, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 hung upon the wall. Alter supper the family dis\-
perses to different houses to sleep, the two women and the little girl stretching out in the hovel where the potatoes and }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 chu\'f1o }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
are stored, while the eldest boy sleeps in a tiny, hive-like hut overlooking the corral to guard the animals and the newly harvested potatoes from theft. Thievery is a constant danger and obsession for the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 campesino. }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93The man in that house once stole sheep from me,\'94 Sixto once said as we crossed the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 puna. }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93
When I strengthen my power in the cooperative I will send him to the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Sepa }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 (a penal colony in the jungle).\'94 The mutual distrust of the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 campesinos, 
}{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 plus the desire of many to divide the land among themselves, have im\-peded the organization of a meaningful co\-operative. Also, of the hacienda\rquote s 200,000 acres, all but one-fifth have been in the Indians\rquote 
 possession for many years. The at\-tempt to fence off a separate pasture for the cooperative\rquote s new breeding cattle, like the enclosure movements of the past, has awakened old conflicts and temptations.
\par \'93The cooperative is a union of people into a single force,\'94 Sixto told me, repeating what the government cooperative \'93promoters\'94 had told him, as we went to talk with }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 campesinos }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 among the 16 Indian communities of the hacienda.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 With the cooperative there will be modern educational techniques, even a school that goes to the fifth grade. [None of the haci\-enda\rquote 
s seven schools\emdash all built by the peas\-ants themselves in recent years\emdash go beyond the second grade.] With the cooperative we will have medical treatment. . . . With the cooperative social and economic differ\-
ences will be removed. . . . We don\rquote t know if this is entirely true. . . . We have been deceived many times. . . . There is much mistrust among our people. . . . Many want to divide the land among themselves and not have a cooperative. . . . We don
\rquote t know .,whether we will have a new life or just a new master, the government, which has ex\-propriated the hacienda to form the co\-operative. Many of us do not know what will happen. Do you think we are doing the right thing?
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 This question is hard to answer. Of the roughly 60 countries in the world now carry\-ing out different kinds of land reform pro\-grams, Peru has d
elayed longest and presents some of the most difficult problems. Its most numerous and depressed rural population lives in a highland region that is grotesquely scarce in productive land, scattered in the folds of remote mountain valleys and on the upper 
reaches of the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 puna, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 dwelling within or at the edge of great }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Iatifundia }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 like the Haci\-
enda Lauramarca. Recent history has shown that agrarian reform is one of the hardest and most complex tasks any society can un\-dertake. Virtually all the great revolutionary movements of this century\emdash 
in Russia, Mexico, China, Bolivia, Cuba, Algeria, Viet\-nam\emdash have held aloft the banner of land re\-form. The many official efforts to settle the old issue of man-land relationships have in some cases crushed the power of the land
lord and the merchant, but in most cases have done less at the cost of much bloodshed, economic dislocation, and official deception. On my own journeys through Latin America over the past decade, I have seen thousands of peasants in several republics for 
whom the new land reform laws have done little but give them an unnegotiable title to the miser\-
able patch of hilly, acidic, eroded soil that the landlord once assigned in exchange for 120 days of unpaid work on the hacienda; that is, the peasant has been locked into sub\-
sistence agriculture with provision neither for expanded production nor for new land for his numerous sons. According to the govern\-ment study }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Aspectos Sociales y Financieros de un programa de Reforma Agraria }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 (sum\-marized in the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Peruvian Times, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 December 11, 1970), there are only }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 149,538 }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
potential family farm units of land available to the agrarian reform for 852,000 eligible peasant families.
\par In what is probably the best book to date on the world\rquote s postwar land reform move\-ments, Doreen Warriner writes 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\qj \fi284\li284\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\tx708\faauto\rin0\lin284\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {\'85
.the recent measures in Persia have been successful, and are indeed unique, because the reform was started, and in the initial stage carried out, by a leader who believes in the peasants\rquote  power to manage their own affairs, and the affairs of 
their country. This belief nowadays is rare, and even rarer is the capacity to give it a practical form\'85. Before criticizing this belief, therefore, in\-ternational experts would do well to look at Latin-American countries, where the sophis\-
ticated talk is so patently insincere and pro\-
duces laws which allow so much exemption to landowners that the area distributed is whittled down to waste land, while officials safeguard their own position by inducing collective farming; or estates are purchased at prices a
bove their market value and handed over to syndicates which cannot work them.}{\super 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\tx708\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 This historical record of error and corruption has led me to believe that the only meaning\-
ful changes in rural society and the land tenure system have come from violent or threatened action by the peasants themselves. In other words, agrarian reform succeeds only after the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 campesino }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 takes matters into his own hands, and thus conquers his own feudal state of mind.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx555\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {What Hope in \lquote Structural Reforms\'94?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx555\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 THE GREAT QUESTION raised\emdash and still to be answered\emdash by the wave of \'93structural reforms\'94
 in Peru today is whether a country so corrupted and weakened by centuries of economic dependence on serfdom and slavery can become a just society. The new agrarian reform either will destroy the parasi\-tism of the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
mestizos }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
who have been feeding on the Indians for centuries, or it will quickly become a sad and lurid farce. The parasitic extraction of wealth from the Indian is such a great tradition even today that, traveling the length of the Peruvian
 sierra as my wife and I did last year in our jeep, one invariably sees the best land\emdash the rich, semitropical river bottoms where the Andes descend be\-low 9,000 feet\emdash still used to grow sugar cane for making }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 aguardiente }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 for sale to the Indians, meaning that 
the most lucrative use of the best land lies in keeping the Indian drunk. Politically, the Andean departments of Peru traditionally have been somewhat akin to the Solid South in the U.S., with heavy overrepresentation in Congress elected by less than one-
fifth of the voting-age popu\-lation, since the Indians cannot vote because of the literacy requirement. The small }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
electorate is so intimately involved with the bureaucracy that roughly one of every three voters is a public employee and nearly all the rest have close relatives work\-
ing for the government. The rural and small-town economy is of such low productivity that the bureaucracy has become the main route of advancement for young }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizos, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
who become schoolteachers, army officers, and agrarian reform bureaucrats.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93Many }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 hacendados }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 and sons of }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 hacend\-
ados }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 are returning to the government as func\-tionaries implementing the agrarian reform,\'94 a young Peruvian anthropologist told me. \'93Many estate managers are staying on to administer the expropriated ha
ciendas, so there has been little change in the traditional relations between }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizos }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 and Indians.\'94
 The proliferation of Peruvian universities over the past decade has glutted the job market with ill-trained lawyers and agronomists. The number of agronomists graduated each year doubled between 1961 and 1965}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 , }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 and the only employment open to these graduates is in the agrarian reform bureaucracy with very low pay; indeed, not to employ them would threaten the government with the opposition of a jobless white-
collar proletariat in the towns of the sierra. They often feel degraded by being stranded among the Indians, the idea of a desk job in Lima being closer to their hearts, and generally they work with little energy or enthusiasm. While it is still far too e
arly for final judgments, the land reform so far seems to benefit its own employees more than the mass of peasants, and is threatened with strangulation by its own hands.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 On a long reporting trip I made to Cuba a few years ago, I found that virtually every }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 casa grande }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 of every nationalized hacienda had been converted into a school for the symbolic and functional purposes of creating a new society. In Peru today most of the manor houses of the great haciendas are be\-
ing inhabited by agrarian reform function\-aries, and sometimes by army colonels as well. This may give added weight to a talk I had recently during a visit to Lima\rquote s Luri\-gancho prison with Hector B\'e9
jar, the lone surviving leader of the guerrilla insurrections of the mid-l960s. He is the lean, lithe, be\-spectacled son of an Ayacucho }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 hacendado, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
born in the Andean area where he was to lead the most successful of the three guerrilla op\-erations. \'93We of the left must be more agile now that the military have become revolu\-tionaries,\'94 B\'e9jar said wryly.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {We can expect more social conflict as the agrarian reform is applied. You cannot ex\-
pect peasants already in possession of in\-vaded lands they paid for with their blood also to pay for it with 20-year bonds. The government cannot force this kind of pay\-ment
. The hacienda system remains intact, with agrarian reform bureaucrats replacing the old hacendados and majordomos in run\-
ning the haciendas, now called cooperatives. What we are seeing is a so-called revolution of the middle class on the make, an alliance between military and civilian technicians of the middle class, mainly interested in better jobs for themselves.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par Hundreds of Indians listened quietly on the ground outside a whitewashed adobe schoolhouse on a bright Saturday morning in an assembly called by government \'93pro\-moters\'94
 sent by the Ministry of Agriculture to organize the cooperative at the Hacienda Lauramarca. The }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 campesinos\rquote  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
bodies were wrapped in worn and dusty ponchos, crowned with floppy sheepskin hats, with wads of }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 coca }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 bulging in their jaw
s. They sat on the ground in phalanxes of passive and muted suspicion, listening almost inertly to the speeches in}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Quechua of the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizo }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93promoters\'94 ranged before them behind a row of schooldesks and a small lectern from which they took turns presiding. Among the \'93promotors\'94 were three }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 se\'f1oritas\emdash }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 an}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 anthropologist, a social worker, and a home economics teacher\emdash 
very pretty in dark glasses and flowing kerchiefs beneath broad-brimmed cowboy hats, wrapped in the kind of neo-Inca wool ponchos with animal de\-signs sold to tourists in Cuzco, the \'93archeo\-logical capital of America.\'94
 The men were cooperative organizers, veterinarians, and agronomists, recently contracted by the ex\-panding land reform bureaucracy, many of them sons of small }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 hacendados }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
of the Cuzco region. Speaking in Quechua, the \'93promotors\'94 told the Indians:
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {
The Revolutionary government has decreed the agrarian reform to end your sufferings. Within the hacienda we have set aside 25 acres to build a new town. All will come to live there. There will be
 a cooperative store with low prices. The agrarian reform will buy pure-bred animals to improve your herds. The cooperative will buy all your products, and you will have trucks of your own. We will build you a dairy factory to process your milk, butter, a
nd cheese, and there will be artificial insemination as well, and you can bring your weaving to sell through the cooperative. Yet remember there is a law giving a jail sentence to those who say false things to sabotage the agrarian re\-
form. You should report these people to the proper authorities.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 After three weeks of visiting and persuad\-ing the Indians to form a cooperative, the \'93promotors\'94
 left the Hacienda Laurainarca to form cooperatives elsewhere. Some of the more concerned \'93promotors\'94 had urged the regional agrarian reform director in Cuzco that two or three staff members stay at the hacienda for a year or so to help the co\-
operative through its initial period. However, the director said that Lima had assigned him too many cooperatives to organize, and that he needed all the \'93promotors\'94
 he could get to swarm over the haciendas of the region so he could report to Lima that his quota had been fulfilled. Consequently, the formation of the cooperative had changed very little at the Hacienda Lauramarca.
\par \'93The Indians still live in their hovels and tend their animals and are cheated by the merchants of Ocongate, who tell them the agrarian reform will take away their land and their animals and will make them work from dawn to dark,\'94
 a young schoolteacher told me,
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
Then some students from the University of Cuzco came to the hacienda and told the peasants that the only real agrarian reform is with blood, that the land is theirs and they should not pay for it with government bonds. The Indians are very suspicious 
of paying dues to the cooperative. They actually had saved some money to buy the land, and were surprised that the agrarian reform would not be dividing the hacienda. The agrarian re\-
form tells them the land and the animals are all theirs, but they are not sure this is true. They are so used to being cheated by the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mistis, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
mestizo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 merchants, and govern\-ment officials they deal with, that they don\rquote t know what to believe. When the Indians go to town to apply for a birth certificate so they can register th
eir children for school, the municipal secretary of Ocongate requires them to bring \'93gifts\'94
 of sheep and cheese and beer, besides paying a high fee, before he will issue the birth certificate. As it is, the municipal secretary is often drunk, and swears violently at the Indians, and more often than not gets the child\rquote 
s name wrong, so the boy or girl must carry the wrong name with him on identity papers and official rec\-ords for the rest of his life.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Around the time the agrarian reform \'93promoters\'94 left the Hacienda Lauramarca to form cooperatives elsewhere, a govern\-
ment-appointed manager moved into the manor house formerly occupied by the old administrator, and the new manager immediately tangled with the Indians\emdash as did the old one\emdash over their invasion of the cen\-
tral pasture lands reserved for the hacienda. The new manager was pulled from his horse by some Indian women whom he found herd\-ing their sheep through an opening they had cut in the barbed-wire fence. After this hap\-pened, my friend Sixto Flores Yuc
ra, presi\-dent of the new cooperative, told me in a moment of confusion and despair that the only escape for the Indian is to become a }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cholo, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 to become as much a part of the }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 misti }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 power structure as he can.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 comuneros, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 who have been cutting the barbed 
wire must be made to understand that they are invading state property, that they are abusing the agrarian reform effort and creating obstacles. . . . I was stupid not to reenlist in the army 20 years ago. They taught me a little Spanish and to read a litt
le, although I never went to school, and by now I could have become a sergeant or a prison guard.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 II
\par Twilight of the Gods
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 There\rquote s something cursed, it seems to me, about a country where men have owned men as prop\-erty. The stink of that corruption never 
escapes the soul, and it is the stink of future evil.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx1428\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \emdash BERNAND MALAMUD, }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The Fixer.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\pvpara\dropcapli2\dropcapt1\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 A
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 CCORDING TO AN OLD PROVERB of the Peruvian sierra, \'93the Indian is the kind of beast that most resembles Man.\'94
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The Indian and his culture have always been Peru\rquote s great beauty and agony and main source of national identity. Yet the labyrin\-
thine social and psychological depths of the Indian problem, raising complex issues of race, class, and property, are fully equal to those of the Negro question in the United States.}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Thro
ugh nearly all its history, the Peruvian economy has depended on various forms of involuntary servitude, dating back to Inca times. For centuries in the colonial period, forced Indian labor worked the mines and haciendas of the sierra, while Negro slaves 
worked the great plantations of the coast in the kind of classic slave economy developed in the Caribbean and Brazil.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 When Negro slavery was abolished in 1854, the coastal }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 hacendados }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
frenetically imported indentured Chinese coolies, under conditions resembl
ing the outlawed slave trade, who were bossed in the fields and hunted as fugitives by freed black overseers. When international pressures forced an end to the coolie trade, recruiters from the coastal haciendas traveled among the Indian com\-
munities of th
e northern sierra, hiring Indians for their plantations with a small advance payment that trapped them into a permanent form of debt-servitude, and often paying local government officials a commission for each Indian recruited. The abolition of slavery ha
d created a recurrent and critical labor shortage that led finally to the creation of a new native proletariat on these coastal plantations.
\par In the Andes the Spanish conquest pressed the former Inca empire into the European mercantile economy. Under the Inc
as all taxes were paid in labor, and money was unknown. After Pizarro captured and killed the Inca monarch Atahualpa in 1533, the customary peasant obligations to till the lands of the state and the Sun were trans\-
ferred to Spanish Crown appointees called }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 ecomenderos }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 who, besides utilizing unpaid Indian labor, deranged the traditional econ\-
omy by demanding tribute in gold and in produce not locally grown. At the same time the Inca draft labor quota for public works, known as the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mita, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 was convened into mass
 mobilizations for forced labor in the colonial mines. The colonial bureaucracy was soon swollen with }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizos, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
mulattoes, and freed Negroes exacting more and more tribute from the Indians, who were also forced to buy a wide variety of luxury goods imported from Spain.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
Shortly before he was captured and marched in chains to his execution before a grandstand full of Crown dignitaries in the Plaza de Armas of Cuzco, the rebel Indian chieftain Jos\'e9 Gabriel T\'fapac Amaru (1741\emdash  81), today the leading symbol of Fe
rn\rquote s \'93Revolutionary government,\'94 wrote a letter to a high official to explain the great rebel\-lion. Wealthy, Jesuit-educated, permitted by the Spaniards to ride a horse and to collect Indian tribute, T\'fapac Amaru wrote to the royal }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 visitador:
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {This system h
as placed us near death, with its immense excesses. What these Castillians have bought for 2 or 3 pesos they force on us for 10 or 12; a cheap knife is sold for 10 times the real value. They force on us brooches, fancy hatpins, blue bath powder, cheap eye
glasses, rubber stamps, and other ridiculous things, as if we Indians used these Spanish fashions.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
Like Spain, Peru became a mercantile and bureaucratic society. It was modeled along the colonial principle that all traders and officials must be European Spaniards, and no overseas trade was permitted except with Spain. The same mercantile system was re
\-produced in miniature even in remote haci\-endas like Lauramarca, whose manor house was burned down in the T\'fapac Amaru re\-bellion, where the hacienda monopoli
zed trade with its serfs, a practice later recreated among the new Indian proletariat on the coastal plantations.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The image of T\'fapac Amaru is everywhere in Peru today. His rebellion and martyrdom now have a kind of religious significance, and the \'93Revoluti
onary government\'94 has adopted an imagined likeness of him as its official symbol. Although There are no extant por\-traits of T\'fa
pac Amaru, an extraordinary image of him has been created by the pop artists of the promotion department of the Ministry of Agric
ulture and spread about the country on billboards, in official pamphlets, and on signs at schools, factories, and at the entrance to expropriated haciendas where cooperatives have been formed by the gov\-
ernment. It is a simple, black-and-white head with a 
high, broad-brimmed hat and a starched collar reminiscent of the dress of the Puritans of 17th-century New England; the image is symmetrical, save for a shadow on the left side of the face, which gives him a harsh, haunted, distant look. The shadow on his
 face stresses T\'fapac Amaru\rquote s Indian facial structure, yet his upper-class European dress makes him resemble one of the old }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 landlords of the sierra.
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {These old cultural molds are proving an imposing obstacle to the revolutionary changes being attempte
d in Peru today. This was shown dramatically in January when 5 Indians were killed and 20 wounded in a clash with rural police near the town of Carhuaz in the scenic Andean valley of the Callej\'f3
n de Huaylas, which was devastated by the May 1970 earthquake that killed some 50,000 persons and left hundreds of thou\-
sands of others homeless. Whole towns were destroyed by the earthquake and then the avalanches of water and mud that descended into the Callej\'f3n when the crown of Mount Huascar\'e1n, the highest peak i
n the Peruvian Andes, collapsed and released the waters of an inland lake.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 One of the most striking psychological phenomena in this havoc was the surviving }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 townspeople\rquote s intense fear of the surrounding Indian population. They pre\-ferred to sleep on
 cold mountainsides and live without food for several days rather than seek refuge in Indian huts. The rising ten\-sions between Indians and }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizos }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
in the area was reflected in an editorial in }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 El Piano de Huar\'e1z, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 the newspaper of the depart\-mental capital, entitled \'93Campesino Go Home,\'94 accusing the Indians of \'93
causing a grave and permanent problem with the arti\-ficial presence of people [in Huar\'e1z] who are not of the city but of the country. The in\-flux stems from the handing out of food and this having fi
nished there is nothing for you [Indians] to do in the city and therefore it is urged... that you go back to your homes and allow us to have a decorous life.\'94 The paper also attacked the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizos }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 who \'93have quickly left their homes to rent them to bank\-ing and state entities at prohibitive prices and have gone to live in tents.\'94
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
The official version of the January clash between Indians and police at the Hacienda San Antonio outside Carhuaz sounds like an episode from one of the classic novels of the Peruvian sierra. Among the Indian commu\-
nities surrounding Carhuaz leaflets were cir\-culated containing the text of the decree-law governing reconstruction of the earthquake zone, with a false article added granting im\-munity for invasion of lands. Shortly there\-a
fter, Indians from five communities de\-scended upon the Hacienda San Antonio, which was owned by relatives of the subpre\-fect of Carhuaz. The subprefect sent police to the hacienda, who arrested the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 comuneros\rquote  
}{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 leaders, upon which roughly 2,000 Indians surrounded Carhuaz, armed with sticks, machetes, and old guns. The Indians then en\-
tered the town in three columns, occupying the city hail, the main plaza, and the police station and taking the subprefect\rquote s wife as hostage. The departmental prefect ordered police reinforcements sent from Huaraz to \'93impose order in the zone,
\'94 resulting in 5 Indians dead, 20 wounded, and many more arrested on charges of \'93cattle-stealing, prop\-erty damage, land invasion, violation of in\-dividual property.\'85 etc.\'94
\par Shortly after the incident Monsignor Luis Bambaren, the tall Jesuit who is the aux\-iliary bishop assigned to Lima\rquote s squatter slums as well as a native of the earthquake zone, issued a statement in his role as presi\-dent of the Bishops\rquote 
 Commission for Social Action which warned that the Carhuaz bloodshed is 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {
a symptom of a deep malaise that summons us to reflect beyond these concrete facts to see more profound evils. . . . Good laws are not enough if an authentic revolutionary mystique does not exist at all levels of the pu
blic administration. Otherwise, frustration cannot be avoided in the face of incomplete execution of the laws or of deals contrary to justice that are made through conversion of family, friendship, or business interests.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Padre Ricardo Antoncich, secretary of the Bishops\rquote  Commission, later explained:
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {
The hopes of the dispossessed have been awakened, but these isolated events seem to show that distrust and disillusion are begin\-ning to undermine this hope. I have seen a very bad situation in some rural zone
s where the agrarian reform has not been applied be\-
cause of very complex difficulties. This is even more dramatic in the earthquake zone where practically all means of production have been destroyed. The commitment, moreover, is not to reconstruct the misery but to build a new society.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 In a recent speech before 100,000 people in the Plaza de Armas in Lima, President Velasco dealt with mounting complaints of this kind.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {We understand [he said] that the old public administration is inadequate for the purpos
es of a government that wishes to transform rather than maintain the traditional system. This explains why many public servants at all levels are insensitive to the changes of the Revolution. Moreover, not understanding that Peru now lives in a new epoch,
 many of them frequently act as saboteurs of the Revo\-
lution. The Revolutionary government will have to correct this situation with energetic measures. But citizens should also insist on a new attitude and should not tolerate any more the insolence, unjusti
fiable slowness, and corruption of bad functionaries. . . . We understand very well that many believed in October 1968 that this was just another mili\-
tary coup. This involved the initial distrust and skepticism of some sectors of the people and the true s
urprise of some intellectuals, who could not believe that this would be a revolutionary process. Nevertheless, nobody can now reasonably remain in doubt.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\outlinelevel3\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {\b Background: Native Compradors
\par }\pard\plain \qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 and Foreign Entrepreneurs
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 TO FULLY APPRECIATE the audacity of the reforms being undertaken by Peru\rquote s mili\-
tary rulers, no matter how flawed they may appear in their execution, one must have a much clearer idea of the peculiar concentrations of political and economic power that made Peru for most of its republican history the
 Land of the Interlocking Directorate. Its political history at times has seemed like that of a banana republic without bananas, and its successive economic policies a series of mindless scrambles for the next foreign loan, for which its export and custom
s revenues were regularly hocked as security.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
The Peruvian ruling class, especially as it developed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, was much less an oligarchy in the Greek sense of the word than a variant of the native }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 comprador }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 class 10 that arose in China with the establishment of Western trading en\-claves. Britain\rquote s financing of the Latin-American Wars of Independence made her the principal creditor of virtually every re\-
public, and she soon became the dominant trading power in the area for the next cen\-tury. Three large Peruvian bond flotations on the London market during the 1820s, equal to roughly five times the new republic\rquote 
s current revenues, made Peru Britain\rquote s third-largest debtor in Latin America within five years of winning independence; by 1875 Peru had borrowed more money in London than any of the other new nations.}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 This enormous debt was made possible by Peru\rquote s exports of guano, the nitrogen-rich bird drop\-pings dug from the offshore islands in the cold Humboldt current for its remark
able fertilizing properties, which by the mid\-1850s was Britain\rquote s biggest single import from Latin America, bringing Peru its great\-est wealth since discovery of the silver mines in the 16th century.}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033 
\par }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par How the income from guano exports was used by Peru\rquote s rulers is a fascinating tale. In 1849, after payment of the British bonds had been in default for 23 years, the bond\-
holders, backed by British diplomats and the British navy, won an agreement that half the proceeds of the booming guano sales in Great Britain would be delivered in cash to the bondholders\rquote 
 agents. Since the stuff was sold abroad on monopoly consignment to foreign merchant houses, who inflated ship\-ping and handling costs, the Peruvian gov\-ernment\rquote s income from the London guano sales was greatl
y reduced. As a result of furious public debate in Lima as to whether Peru was being swindled out of its guano revenues, the government began issu\-ing guano export franchises to Peruvian busi\-
nessmen, whose first impulse was to sell them to foreign merchant houses at a profit. After this was officially prohibited, the same insiders launched a spectacular financial op\-eration politely known as consolidation of the internal debt.
\par The government\rquote s internal debt largely consisted of old claims for property dam
ages during the Wars of Independence; slaves drafted into the army; cattle and crops seized to feed troops; farms, buildings, and crops destroyed, etc. Friends of the government frantically combed the capitol\rquote 
s archives for old claims and forged other documents to exchange them for new government bonds that within three years swelled the public debt fivefold.\rquote }{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033 4 }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
Such political scandal re\-sulted that the new bondholders were afraid the government would fall and the next one would repudiate the debt; so the go
vernment secretly negotiated a contract with two French banks to swap the new bonds for gold to be repaid out of proceeds from guano sales in France. When the terms of the con\-
tract were published, a revolution occurred in 1854 that ousted the government, freed the slaves, and abolished the hated }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cotribuci\'f3n de ind\'edgenas, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
the Indian head tax that was the mainstay of the internal revenue sys\-tem. An investigating commission later de\-cided that half the new bonds were based on illegal or fraudulent claims, but the new gov\-
ernment chose to pay off the French bankers to save Peru\rquote s international credit standing. 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 In this way Peru became, until the pres\-
ent military regime seized power in 1968, one of the most submissive fields of foreign business operations in Latin America. The guano boom financed a program of high-cost railroad construction in the Andes exe\-
cuted by an American, Henry Meiggs. The bubble lasted less than a decade, and was fabricated entirely of bonds. According to Meiggs\rquote s brother and partner, \'93you are prob\-
ably aware that we take bonds for the work: The amount seems at first thought large, but if security amounts to anything, we have the whole of Peru, Boots & Breeches.\'94 When the bubble burst, Meiggs was even authorized to issue his own paper mo
ney to pay off his workers, mostly Chileans and Chinese coolies; Indian labor was so despised that many thousands of foreign workers were im\-ported to build railroads even in the high altitudes that were the Indians\rquote  native habitat.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 However, the government
 budget was so swollen by maintaining a large army, civilian bureaucracy and pension list, and by paying off a huge public debt that, even with its enormous guano revenues, the treasury was empty and railroad construction stopped.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 By then the great mounds of guano stick\-ing out of the sea were nearly exhausted. New hopes were raised from the booming nitrate industry in Peru
\rquote s southern deserts, but these lands were soon lost in the dis\-astrous War of the Pacific (1879\emdash 84) to Chilean armies that swarmed all over Peru, spurred on by Chinese coolies who served as a Fifth Column and mounted plantation re\-
bellions in their vanguard. When the war was over, Peru and Bolivia had lost their nitrate lands\emdash and Bolivia her entire seacoast\emdash to Chilean and British nitrate financiers.
\par The guano boom left the Peruvian govern\-ment in bankruptcy, but enriched many mer\-chants and politicians in Lima, who plowed their profits into the sugar plantations and the nascent capitalism that formed the eco\-nomic base of the Peruvian oliga
rchy. This oligarchy was not seriously threatened until the 1960s, when its economic and political power gave way under the impact of both the great peasant migrations from the sierra into Lima and the mushrooming of U.S. business investments in Peru, and
 the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 coup de grace }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 was delivered by the present \'93Rev\-olutionary government.\'94 Peru\rquote 
s financial prostration after the War of the Pacific, and its utter dependence on loans, led it to dele\-gate its tax-collecting functions to a con\-sortium of the five largest Lima banks, known as the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Caja de Dep\'f3
sitos y Consignaciones, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 which for the next seven decades not only charged commissions for tax-collecting and indulged in fraudulent accounting practices, but also lent out the government\rquote 
s money at high interest both to the public and to the government itself. The great appeal of the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Caja }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
for the government was that it made the Lima banks a sure source of more loans and intermediaries for foreign credit. During the stock market craze and commodity boom of the 1920s, the Peruvian foreign debt in\-
creased nearly tenfold, mainly through $143 million in loans from New York banks which led to the appointment of an American in 1921 as administrator of Peruvian customs to guarantee the loans.
\par One of the most notorious of all the esca\-pades of the National City Bank of New York in Latin America during the twenties was the payment of a $450,000 bribe to the son of dictator Augusto B. Legu\'eda (1919\emdash  30) for \'93not interfering\'94
 with the floating of $100 million in bond issues, which were sold at a handsome profit to American in\-vestors before Legu\'eda was overthrown and the bonds went into default.}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
The over\-seas manager of the National City Bank re\-ported in July 1927, shortly before the bonds were issued, that \'93Its [Peru\rquote s] principal sourc
es of wealth, the mines and oil wells, are nearly all foreign-owned, and excepting for wages and taxes, no part of the value of their production remains in the country. As a whole, I have no great faith in any ma\-terial betterment of Peru\rquote 
s economic condi\-tion in the near future.\'94 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s5\qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\outlinelevel4\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {The Impermanence of Great Fortunes
\par }\pard\plain \qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 and Families
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par THE MOST STRIKING PHENOMENON about the Peruvian oligarchy during this cen\-tury is the impermanence of the so-called great fortunes and families. Their economic ascendancy is nearly always truncated by two factors: their craven dependence on po\-
litical favors and their degeneracy; i.e., incapacity to produce competent heirs. The French sociologist Fran\'e7ois Bourricaud may have had in mind the Prado family, which twice exercised the p
residency in the three decades preceding 1962 and belonged to the inner circles for the rest of the time, when he observed that 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 these \'93empires\'94 are much less centralized than they seem... and are often very badly managed. . . . The \'93empire\'94 will defend it\-
self, obtaining customs protection. In a short time the prices fixed by the \'93empire\'94 are abnormally high, not only in comparison with foreign prices but also with internal competition, and it makes the wrong invest\-ments, The \'93empire\'94
 is nourished more by speculative than monopolistic profits. But when an adverse administrative decision comes, all is lost}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033 .}{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par During the second administration of Presi\-dent Manuel Prado (1939\emdash 45; 1956\emdash 62), the Prados\rquote  family bank, the Banco Popular, obtained a concession from the other banks belonging to the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Caja }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 to become the govern\-ment\rquote s principal revenue-collecting agent, and remained so until the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Caja }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 was nation\-
alized in 1963. However, even this was not enough to assure the prosperity of Peru\rquote s larg\-est banking chain. When the \'93Revolutionary government\'94 nationalized the nearly-bank\-
rupt Banco Popular last year to prevent a takeover by the local subsidiary of the Chase Manhattan Bank, it found something ap\-proaching a Mafia-style operation of syste\-matically using depositors\rquote 
 money for loans to politicians and businesses and to the head of the clan\rquote s homosexual partners. These un\-paid loans were kept on the books as assets, and dividends on nonexistent profits were distributed among stockholders. The tradi\-
tional private bank was at the heart of a group or clan\rquote s business operations, and its primary function was to finance expansion of the group\rquote 
s own political and economic activities. When the military regime took over the Banco Popular last June, there were so many bad loans to the Prados\rquote  own busi\-
nesses, many of which were themselves near bankruptcy, that the government found itself in a position to nationalize two television channels, a large newspaper, two textile mills, and Peru\rquote s largest cement factory, be\-sides the Banco Popular
\rquote s branches in neigh\-boring Bolivia, which form that country\rquote s largest private bank.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par When the 1969 land reform law was de\-creed, one of the immediate consequences was the bankruptcy of an important ally and business associate of the Prados, the House of Asp\'ed
llaga, one of the traditional families of the Peruvian oligarchy whose mansion was a great aristocratic center in Lima. The source of the Asp\'edllaga fortune was Cayalt\'ed, a 20,000-acre sugar hacienda on the north coast, but the family branched
 off into bank\-ing, insurance, cement, electric power, a brewery, glass-making, and real estate. The Asp\'edllagas have long held directorships of the Sociedad Nacional Agraria and the Banco Popular. Shortly before the agrarian reform was decreed, Cayalt
\'ed was sold to a syndicate of Cuban exiles and the Asp\'edllagas obtained a }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 $3.5 }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 million loan from the Banco Popu\-lar on which no payment was ever made.
\par When I visited Cayalt\'ed, once known as the jewel of Peru\rquote s coastal plantations and one of the few that were entirely owned by Peru\-vians, there was a sign at the entrance that read: \'93Welcome If You Don\rquote t Make Trou\-ble.\'94
 The place was in acute decline and disarray, in contrast with the other, highly efficient sugar haciendas taken by the agrar\-ian reform. The mill was
 reached by a bumpy, dusty road, littered with dried scraps of sugar cane, that differed greatly from the modern internal road systems of the other haciendas. The great manor house looked across a garden and an empty swim\-
ming poor to the smokestacks of the mill that suffused the place with a strong smell of molasses.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The manager of the newly formed coop\-erative told me:
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {The place is in a mess. The mill has to be completely replaced. The workers\rquote 
 houses are hovels, built at the turn of the century. They are overcrowded because the owners didn\rquote t care who lived in them, and so the workers brought in their relatives from the sierra, giving Cayalt\'ed
 a population of 19,000 supported by only 2,000 workers. The sons of Asp\'edllaga had no talent or appetite for the business. Many years ago they spent a lot of money on new machinery, and it turned out to be the wrong kind of equip\-
ment. There were strikes and social conflict, and they just didn\rquote t bother to come around anymore.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s6\qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\outlinelevel5\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs36\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {\b\fs32 III
\par }\pard\plain \qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx1604\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\b\i\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The Changes
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx1604\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i\fs22\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 THE NEW AGRARIAN REFORM and the other radical measures decreed by the \'93Revolutionary government\'94
 are climaxing the swift and convulsive change that Peru has been experiencing in the postwar years. This proc\-ess has embraced the rapid growth of towns, a flood of peasant migrants 
into the cities, the mushrooming of public education, the rise of a large middle class that dominates the government bureaucracy, the punching of penetration roads into remote mountains and jungles, and a series of peasant rebellions in the Andes of incre
asing frequency and vio\-lence that led to the guerrilla insurrections of the 1960s. In this process millions of In\-dians have become }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cholos, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
identifying with populist political movements and generating powerful pressures for reform.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The magnitude of this social epic is re\-
flected in the recent educational statistics, which show that school enrollments doubled over the past decade and university attend\-ance grew more than fourfold; indeed, be\-tween 1958 and 1966 the number of Peruvian universities increased f
rom 5 to 34. Despite a tragically high dropout rate, incom\-petent teaching and backward curriculum, hundreds of thousands of peasant teenagers each year move into adobe hovels at the out\-skirts of provincial and departmental capi\-
tals to finish their primary and secondary studies, subsisting mainly on potatoes and }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 chu\'f1o }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sent monthy by their families in re\-mote villages and Indian communities.
\par Between the censuses of 1940 and 1961, 17 Peruvian cities doubled their populations, three of them growing more than tenfold. But the most dramatic instance of urbaniza\-
tion in Peru is the avalanche like descent of peasants from the sierra into Lima, the clas\-sic primate city, which has tripled in size since 1940 to a population of about }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 2.5 }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mil\-
lion. Each day some 200 buses and from 1,000 to 1,500 trucks arrive from the Andes to La Parada, Lima\rquote s central marketplace and terminal, which is both the heart of the big city\rquote 
s underworld and the main sieve for the adaptation of new peasant migrants to city life. There are acres of }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cholo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
cobblers in blue work-aprons, sitting on rustic stools behind foot-powered sewing machines, wait\-ing all day for a pair of shoes. Swirling crowds of peddlers and porters, fresh from the sierra, hustle for a dollar a day\emdash far more than the going 
wage for unskilled labor in most provincial towns\emdash wandering through the great market in rubber-tire san\-dals. La Parada is also where }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 barriada }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
land invasions of the desert hills surrounding Lima are organized by migrants trying to escape from the teeming, reeking }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 callej\'f3n }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
slums of the center city. There have been more than 100 such invasions of vacant urban land over the past 20 years,}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 the in\-vaders inevitably carrying red-and-white Pe\-
ruvian flags, answering with their slingshots the teargas assaults of ri
ot police sent to evict them and to burn the gaunt shacks of straw matting and bamboo poles built on the desert hillsides overnight. Within two or three years, the shacks undergo a remarkable transformation, from straw to adobe to brick construction, fina
nced by the savings of workers earning less than three dollars daily.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 According to John Turner of the Harvard-M.I.T. Joint Center for Urban Studies,
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 let us imagine we are looking down on Lima. Looking back 25}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
years we see a smallish and quite compact city of some 600,000 people. Looking forward 25}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 years we see a sprawling metropolis of some 6 million inhabitants. Barring world catastro\-
phe, Lima will have grown 1,000 percent or more in less than a modem man\rquote s lifetime and this will be typical of the majorit
y of major cities in the urbanizing countries. Let us now look at the area that will have grown during those 50 years. Based on simple ex\-trapolation of growth trends from 1940 to the present, by 1990 three-quarters of the population of the entire city
\emdash 4.5 million people\emdash would be living in areas originally settled by squatters\emdash in }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 barriadas }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 or }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 ex\-barriadas.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 In this way the urban population of Latin America has been growing at two or three times the rural growth rates, with the mar\-
ginal populations in the squatter slums in\-creasing at three to four times the general urban rate. With such cities as Lima lead\-ing the way, the worldwide rate of urbaniza\-tion between 1950 and 1960 was twice that of the preceding 50 years.}{
\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Moreover, the present torrent of Latin-American urbaniza\-tion differs basically from that of Europe a century ago, when the rate of industrial em\-
ployment was much higher and the peasant migration rates were much lower. This growth has strained government budgets with enormous demands for schools, streets, hos\-pitals, and electricity, and has hideously in\-flated the overhead costs of economic de
\-velopment. }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The Economist }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 not long ago voiced growing alarm that cities like Lima \'93have outgrown their own means of livelihood.. . . Urban growth has become path\-
ological. It threatens to overlay and stunt the healthy elements of expansion.\'94 Never\-theless, few Peruvians would disagree with the contention of their able foreign minister, one of the ideologues of the \'93Revolutionary government,\'94 that \'93
the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 barriadas, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 a new phenomenon, are a symbol\emdash despite their scars\emdash of the process of liquidation of the feudal system in the Andean region.\'94
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx805\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {The Progress of Land Reform
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx805\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 WITHIN MONTHS of the inauguration in July 1963 of President Fernando Bel\-aunde Terry, a son of
 provincial aristocracy with immense showmanship and popular ap\-
peal, the Indian communities of the central sierra invaded two giant sheep ranches, each roughly the size of Rhode Island, of the U.S.-owned Cerro de Pasco Mining Corporation and the wealthy F
ernandini family, which has important cotton, mining, and real estate in\-terests elsewhere in Peru. Hungry for more pastures because of heavy demographic pres\-
sures on their communal lands, thousands of Indian families, sounding comets and carry-big red-and-white Peruvian flags, cut the wire fences of these great haciendas and de\-
scended upon their upland pastures to build precarious huts. Some came on horseback behind women who formed the forward pha\-lanx, marching with swaddled infants on their backs, casting stones with slingshots at police assault troops with punishing ac\-
curacy. President Belaunde, who was elected on a promise of land reform, traveled with his entire cabinet to the mountain town of Junin and, with great ceremony, signed a pact with Indi
an community leaders that promised them new lands under a sweeping agrarian reform if they would stop the in\-vasions. To keep his word in the face of protracted congressional debate over a new land reform statute, Belaunde borrowed $5 mil\-
lion from the Chase Manhattan Bank at commercial interest rates to finance expro\-priation of the Fernandini estate, Hacienda Algol\'e1n.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Near Cuzco, meanwhile, a group of Indian }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 comuneros }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
led by a few Trotskyites attacked the Hacienda Ninabamba; The landlord and his son had s
ubmachine guns which they fired from the chimney and windows of the manor house, killing eight peasants and wounding 23 more; the incident caused the fall a few days later of the first of Belaunde\rquote 
s eight cabinets (in five years) under censure by an opposition parliament controlled by landlord interests. In January 1964 several hundred peasants invaded the bottomland of the Ha\-
cienda Onocora near the town of Sicuani, where the pasture land and an old flour mill were disputed in a batfle between }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 comuneros }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 an
d police that left 17 dead and 30 wounded, leading to a suspension of constitutional guar\-antees in the southern sierra and a police roundup of \'93communist agitators.\'94 One of those arrested later told me, \'93The }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
sindicatos }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 we organized could not be stopped. I went to Sicuani to tell them not to take rash ac\-tions, but the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 comuneros }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
would not listen and kept on seizing hacienda lands all over the province.\'94
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 It was under President Belaunde\rquote s rule that, in 1964, Peru\rquote s first general land re\-form law was finally 
passed by a Congress frightened by the wave of peasant rebellions and land invasions in the sierra. The 1964 law broke new ground by providing for pay\-ment for expropriated lands in bonds in\-
stead of cash, but otherwise tried to bestride, blunderingly, the great peasant clamor for land and the demands for protection of pow\-erful landlord interests. Few events of the 1960s did more to discredit the parliamen\-
tary system than the deals made by the po\-litical parties in control of Congress to create in the 1964 law huge procedural obstacles and exemptions preventing the expropria\-tion of large haciendas\emdash 
for which, in any case, the land reform agency was systema\-tically starved of funds. At the same time, the 1964 law aggravated Peru\rquote s }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 minifundio }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 problem by prom
iscuously granting provi\-sional titles to hacienda serfs for the mar\-ginal lands they had occupied for centuries, without either expanding these tiny subsis\-
tence plots into more productive units or providing financial or technical support to improve them.
\par The new and more radical land reform law of the \'93Revolutionary government\'94 was drafted mainly by technicians who had worked with the 1964 law for five years, and retained many of its key provisions. The main differences are the streamlining of ex\-
propriation procedures, elimination of escape clauses, creation of a minimum family-farm unit (7.5}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 acres), and granting export pri\-
orities to cooperatives formed by agrarian reform beneficiaries. The biggest difference, of course, is the will and authority of a mili\-tary regime to carry out an ambitious expro\-priation program aimed at eliminating all old-style }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 latifundios }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 by 1975.
\par 
\par }{\b\i\fs28\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Land Reform on the Coast
\par }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 ON THE DAY OF General Velasco\rquote s speech proclaiming the new land reform law, the \'93Revolutionary government\'94 m
oved to expropriate the great coastal sugar mills and haciendas, or \'93agroindustrial complexes,\'94 that had been specifically exempted from expropriation under the old law.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The most important of these \'93agroindus\-trial complexes\'94 is Casa Grand; the largest sug
ar hacienda in all South America and the biggest agricultural estate in Peru, with 260,-000 acres in the rich Chicama Valley on the Pacific Coast and another million acres in cattle and timber lands in the northern sierra and along the semitropical easter
n slopes of the Andes. Casa Grande today is an ocean of tall, golden-green stalks of sugar cane, with small clearings for sleepy towns that once were Indian communities, long ago de\-
prived of their lands, with such names as Ascope, Santiago de Cao, and Paij\'e1n, cen\-ters of the great Chim\'fa culture of pre-Inca times.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
For irrigation, there are 159 small dams operated electronically from a central switch board. The irrigated fields spread westward for nearly 30 miles from the Pan-American highway to the foothills
 of the Andes, where the Chicama River begins to form its broad flood plain, the biggest of the 50-odd river valleys producing occasional green gashes of fertility along Peru\rquote 
s 2,000-mile desert coast. Among these dense masses of sugar cane runs an excelle
nt system of asphalt roads, better than any public highway in Peru, built for large trailer trucks bringing cane from the fields to the towering mill that belches smoke day and night, forming the center of this little world, built right next to the mas\-
ter\rquote s house that is shaded by huge trees a century old.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
The mill is the greatest modern monument of the valley, built more than a half-century ago by the German owners of Casa Grande, the Gildermeister family. It took German engineers four years to install the new ma\-
chinery after the Gildermeisters merged with a Bremen consortium that financed it, be\-ginning operations just in time to cash in on the post-World War I boom in sugar prices. The insatiable appetite of the huge mill for more and more cane, plus th
e powerful fi\-nancial backing of the Gildermeisters that enabled them to benefit from the boom-and-bust cycles of the sugar industry when smaller enterprises failed, turned Casa Grande into the center of an efficient and constantly ex\-
panding economic machine. In this way some 2,500 families lost their farms to the three great haciendas of the Chicama Valley, Casa Grande and Laredo, owned by the Gilder\-
meisters, and Cartavio, owned by W. R. Grace & Co. of the United States. In the meantime the valley became
 one of the main industrial centers of Peru, with 100,000 workers concentrated there, turning the mill centers into virtual cities with administrative offices, churches, a hospital, primary and secondary schools, bank branches, stores, and later movie hou
ses, all surrounded by the densely packed workers\rquote  dwelling com\-pounds.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 To the tensions created by the swallow\-
ing-up of hundreds of small haciendas by the great estates and the sudden creation of a large rural proletariat, another development at Casa Grand
e was added that disturbed the life of the region even more. Between 1917 and 1920 The Gildermeisters came to the aid of the financially desperate govern\-ment in Lima with loans totaling (British) \'a3
 244,000, and obtained a permit to build their own port through which they could export sugar and import consumer goods duty-free. They established a huge super\-market, or \'93bazaar,\'94
 on the hacienda which made Casa Grande the dominant commercial establishment in the region, mining local merchants in the city of Trujillo thanks to price advantages derived from the Gilder\-meisters\rquote 
 having their own ships, railroad, and duty-free port.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Business activity practically ceased in the small towns of the valley, and the Chamber of Commerce of Trujillo repeatedly pro\-tested i
n vain to the government against the \'93scandalously ruinous\'94
 practices of unfair competition by the bazaar at Casa Grande. The result was a political alliance against the power of the Gildermeisters between the dispossessed landowners of the Chicama Valley,
 the urban middle class, and the new sugar proletariat on the great haciendas, a pattern repeated throughout northern Peru. This led to the formation of Latin America\rquote s first \'93multi-class\'94
 political party, APRA (American Popular Revolutionary Alliance), the only mass movement in Peruvian history, which has drifted steadily to the Right over the past three decades, yet remains Pen\rquote s strongest political party.}{
\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The leadership of both APRA and the Peruvian military officer corps come from the provincial }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mid\-
dle class, yet an alliance between the two has always been blocked by the blood feud re\-sulting from a 1932 APRA uprising in Trujillo in which 11 army officers were taken hostage and killed, and later hundreds of APRA followers were taken to the pre-I
ncaic ruins of Chan-chan in the desert outside Tru\-jillo and shot by army firing squads.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 In the years that followed, the political mobilization of the provincial }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizos }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 would increasingly curtail the power of the coastal oligarchy, yet the feud between A
PRA and the army would leave the traditional ruling class plenty of room for maneuver. In 1948 the sugar and cotton barons could still induce a general to seize power, end exchange con\-
trols, devalue the currency to enlarge their exports, and crack down on the APRA unions on their plantations. Nevertheless, al\-though the bitterness between APRA and the army continues, the larger social pres\-
sures involved were bringing this age to an end.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {On a visit to Casa Grande a few months after it was expropriated by the agrarian re\-
form, I chatted with an old field foreman who recalled the days early in this century when the expansion of Casa Grande was gathering momentum, when there were some 13,000 workers instead of the present auto\-mation-reduced payroll of 5,000.}{\i 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 At 4:30 each morning there was a big lineup in the plaza between the mill and the church [he told me]. The }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 patr
\'f3n, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Gildermeister, was there himself, on horseback, as were the field bosses, and the peons were massed like foot-soldiers in a huge military formation, as\-signed for the day to this field or that, care\-
fully counted so that just enough lunches would be sent to the fields at mid-day. The }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 patr\'f3n }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
was capable of showing up at the mill at crazy hours, at midnight or three in the morning, and would st
and at the gate and personally beat up a worker if he found him stealing. Now the workers have begun to steal automobile and tractor pans from the workshops and plumbing fixtures from the mill. Since the agrarian reform took over, the new manager and his 
agronomists don\rquote t go out on horseback to inspect the fields. They go in jeeps, and they don\rquote t go deep into the cane. At night the new agronomists drive the hacienda\rquote 
s jeeps into the city of Trujillo to go to the movies. Before the agrarian reform it was impossible to take these jeeps outside the hacienda.
\par 
\par The agrarian reform, however, brought a number of important symbolic changes. An old sign was soon torn down that bore a Franciscan motto in Latin, }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93Tace, Ora et Labora\'94 }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 (\'93
Be Silent, Pray and Work\'94) that for nearly a century was seen above the old clock at the entrance to the mill; in its place was painted a likeness of T\'fapac Amaru and a famous slogan in Quechua: }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93
Ama Sua, Ama Llulla, Ama Kella\'94 }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 (\'93Don\rquote t Steal, Don\rquote t Loaf, Don\rquote t Lie\'94). Shortly thereafter, a 
bulldozer demolished the high wall that separated the living quarters of the foreign technicians from those of the Peruvian work\-
ers, to great fanfare and applause. This was the idea of a severe-looking army intelligence colonel with a high-pitched voice who was serving as a kind of political commissar over\-
seeing the operations of the three big sugar haciendas in the Trujillo area that were seized from U.S. and German interests. Each of the expropriated haciendas had such an army overseer, reporting direct
ly to the chief of army intelligence in Lima, who also serves as chairman of the National Agrarian Re\-form Council. The colonel, a graduate of the U.S. army intelligence school in Baltimore, complained to me of
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {the low cultural level of those forming the organizing committees of the new coopera\-
tives. We are trying hard to help them along, and we are working without a political ban\-ner. The new military man is one who thinks and has social feeling. This is a product of the revolution. We can no longer be indif\-
ferent to the problems of Pen and the decep\-tion of her politicians. We had left things to these corrupt civilians long enough.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Casa Grande and the other principal sugar haciendas of the north coast were expro\-priated within a few days of General Vel\-asco\rquote 
s June 1969 speech proclaiming the agrarian reform. Since these \'93agroindustrial complexes\'94 had been specifically exempted from expropriation, after skillful political maneuvering by the sugar interests, under previous agrarian reform legislation, th
e im\-mediate seizure of the big sugar estates by the military regime showed that the \'93Revolu\-tionary government really meant business.\'94
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 At the 13,000-acre Hacienda Tum\'e1n, owned by the aristocratic descendants of Presidents Manuel Pardo (1876\emdash 79) and Jos\'e9 Pardo (1904
\emdash 08 and 1915\emdash 19), and given to the family by Congress after the elder Pardo was assassinated on the Senate floor, the group of Ministry of Agriculture officials sent to take over the hacienda were met by Tum\'e1n\rquote 
s young manager, Juan Pardo Aramburu, who blocked their path and said, \'93
I am sure that President Velasco does not know what he has done in decreeing the agrarian reform law. He has been listening to a group of civilians acting behind the scenes. Also, why must he begin with Tum\'e1n, which is the country\rquote 
s fourth-biggest tax\-payer?\'94 One of the land reform officials re\-plied:
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
I understand that your words are purely subjective, due to the expropriation of your hacienda. But I want to tell you that I think President Velasco knows just what he\rquote s doing. Wasn\rquote 
t his message to the nation on the purpose of the agrarian reform suffi\-ciently clear? Apart from the social purpose, which is to give the land to those who work it, and the economic purpose, which is to redistribute agricultural incomes so as to ex\-
pand the national consumers\rquote  demand for Peruvian products, the agrarian reform also intends to prevent the economic and political monopoly characterized by the existence of an agrarian oligarchy. (Quoted in }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 OIGA 
}{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 [Lima: no. 331], July 4, 1969, p. 44.)
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {The owner of Tum\'e1n was forcibly removed from the hacienda. Within two weeks after Peru\rquote 
s new land reform law was decreed, Fidel Castro gave his endorsement: \'93Our judgment of this law is that it is in reality a radical measure that, if executed fully, can b
e described as revolutionary.... If in Peru a true revolution develops, it does not matter that those who promoted it are a group of military leaders.\'94
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx805\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {The New Workers\rquote  Cooperatives
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx805\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 THE CONVERSION of  Peru\rquote s great agricul\-tural estates into workers\rquote  cooperatives\emdash 
 instead of dividing the land among individual peasants\emdash reflects an effort to preserve economies of scale and thus avoid the production declines and food shortages that have plagued most land reforms in this century. The co\-operative formula in P
eru draws upon the Christian Democratic ideal of communal property, the Marxist principle of collec\-tivized agriculture, and a romantic notion of the ancient Andean traditions of the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 ayllu, }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 or Indian community, espoused by many Peruvian writers in this cen
tury. The idea of turning the big sugar haciendas into cooperatives was proposed by Belaunde in the 1956 election campaign, but it was first formulated nearly three decades before by the arch-enemy of both Belaunde and the generals and colonels who ousted
 him, Victor Raul Haya de la Torre, who wrote in his fundamental work, }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 El Antiimperialismo y el APRA: }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93
The belligerent strength of the middle classes must be used in the benefit of national liberation. They should join in de\-fense of the anti-imperialist State. This sup\-
poses a new economic structuring, based on partial or progressive state comptrollership, and especially in the organization of a vast cooperative system.\'94 When I asked an army colonel recently about the embarrassing paternity of the military regime
\rquote s pet project, he replied:
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {It\rquote 
s true that APRA has been talking about this for decades. But when the time came for action, they always sold out to the oligarchy. When the 1964 agrarian reform law was be\-ing debated in Congress, they made a deal wit
h the landlord interests to exempt the big sugar haciendas from expropriation. So what counts is not who talks about agrarian re\-form, but who carries it out.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx391\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Nevertheless, the success of the new sugar cooperatives, and indeed of the entire process of acc
elerated change, is being jeopardized by the failure of Peru\rquote s military rulers and APRA, still the country\rquote s strongest political party, to reach the understanding that the situation obviously demands. While the \'93Revolutionary government
\'94 firmly exercises political power, APRA just as firmly controls the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sindicatos }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
at the sugar haciendas and is in an excellent position to either support or sabotage the agrarian reform. Ever-mindful of this, the \'93Revolutionary government\'94 re\-peatedly jailed APRA union leaders under a new \'93decree-law\'94 providing summary im
\-prisonment for \'93sabotaging the agrarian re\-form.\'94 The military\rquote s fear that turning the sugar plantations into cooperatives might simply mean handing control of these huge enterprises over to the local APRA political machine has led the 
\'93Revolutionary govern\-ment\'94 to fashion an extraordinary series of regulations governing the day-to-day opera\-tions of the cooperatives, which makes them flimsy semantic fig leaves for state farms.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The new rules prohibit membershi
p in any of the governing bodies of the cooperatives to all persons who have exercised leadership in any political party, or who have benefited from special leave from their jobs while hold\-
ing union office, a feature of both Peruvian labor law and most union contracts. More\-
over, the administrative councils and general assemblies of the cooperatives are packed with white-collar and technical employees, and government representatives will control the finances of the new cooperatives until the expropriation 
bonds are paid off over a 20-year period. To make sure things run smoothly, the army colonels at each hacienda report directly to the chief of army intelli\-
gence in Lima, with frequent consultations with the 11 Intelligence colonels forming the COAP (Committee of Advisers to the Presi\-dency) in the Presidential Palace that plans and oversees the execution of the reform pro\-gram of the \'93
Revolutionary government.\'94 The increasing control of the agrarian re\-form program by the military intelligence ap\-paratus was consummated March 31 with the appointment of General Enrique Vald\'e9s An\-
gulo, chief of army intelligence, as Minister of Agriculture.
\par This supervision has not been able to pre\-vent the agrarian reform bureaucracy from miring itself in an increasing numbe
r of local conflicts. I spent five weeks writing portions of this article in the town of Quillabamba at the edge of the Amazon basin in southern Peru, which had been the scene of the La Convenci\'f3
n Valley peasant uprisings led by Hugo Blanco in the early 1960s and the short-lived 1965 guerrilla uprising led by Luis de la Puente Uceda. As a result of the peasant uprisings, Peru\rquote s first agrarian re\-
form law was specifically decreed in 1963 by an interim military regime in order to ex\-propriate land in the La Convenci\'f3n Valley. Seven years later, titles to the land were finally being distributed, and the local agrar\-
ian reform director proudly invited me to a ceremony m the village of Quelluno, deep in the valley, where the land titles were being handed out. In many parts of the valley, peas\-ants were refusing to accept their titles be\-
cause the plots of land granted them were too small and infertile, usually consisting of the tiny hillside subsistence plots they had al\-ways occupied.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 At the ceremony m Quelluno a progovern\-ment peasant leader, who had moved into the manor house of the hacienda after it was ex\-
propriated and set himself up as a coffee-buyer there, made an impassioned speech in Quechua, urging his audience to \'93denounce the counterrevolutionary enemies of the agrarian reform. The }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 campesinos }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 want arms to defend our agrarian reform.\'94 After this speech ended, six peasants announced that they refused to receive their land titles, and they were immediately arrested. When I in\-terviewed them 20 minutes late
r in the local police station, one of them said:
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {
We stood up at the meeting to ask why we were getting just 10 or 15 acres on a steep hillside while some of our neighbors had be\-tween 200 and 500 acres each. We asked why there was no equality, since land 
is in abundance in some places and the rules say nobody can have more than 75 acres. We want more land, the land of those who have too much. The director of the agrarian re\-form said we could ask questions.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par A good deal of class conflict has been gen\-erated by the coffee-growers\rquote  marketing cooperatives that were formed to take advan\-tage of export priorities granted by law to producers\rquote  cooperatives. In practice, the co\-
operatives are dominated by merchants and richer }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 campesinos }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 who buy coffee from peas\-ant
s desperately in need of cash and resell it to the cooperative at the higher price that is paid after several months. A young priest working in the valley, who is a specialist in cooperative education, told me:
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {Cooperatives imposed from above cannot funct
ion because they do not educate. The main problem is that there is not enough qualified personnel to keep accounts in or\-
der and to teach illiterate people who have been cheated all their lives how to trust each other. Savings-and-loan cooperatives in Peru have been in trouble because of bad loans. Consumers\rquote 
 cooperatives are plagued by bad purchases and the difficulty of finding hon\-est, competent employees. The government has decided to form cooperatives first and educate its members later. Perhaps this i
s unavoidable under the circumstances, but it creates great problems.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par It is a striking and irrefutable fact that, despite these difficulties, the agrarian reform has generated remarkably little disorder or economic dislocation in nearly two years of accelerated land expropriations and the es\-
tablishment of a new form of economic organization. Production has risen on the sugar haciendas because the agrarian reform coincided with the end of a two-year drought in the area, and the Nixon administration last ye
ar granted Peru a large raise in its U.S. sugar quota, at double the world price, in an effort to wind down the crisis generated by Peru\rquote s seizure of the Standard Oil installa\-tions at Talara a few days after the \'93Revolu\-tionary government\'94
 took power. The mili\-tary intelligence system has closely controlled the functioning of the expropriated haci\-
endas, yet has been wise enough to yield when faced with a serious confrontation with the rank-and-file workers. Nevertheless, there has been a nasty series of crises and con\-flicts that point to serious problems in the future.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 My visit to Cayalt\'ed came shortly after the entire hacienda had gone on strike in support of the workers\rquote  }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sindicato }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 against the coopera\-tive, despite the government\rquote s arguments that unions are no longer necessary because the haciendas now belong to the workers\rquote  co\-
operatives. The government has been trying to break the unions, most of them controlled by APRA, by ending check-off of union dues and special leave for union leaders and by re\-quir
ing that the workers address all petitions to the cooperative as individuals and not through the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sindicato. }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The strike at Cayalt\'ed occurred when Antenor Vazquez, the re\-
cently elected secretary-general of the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sindi\-cato, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 was expelled from the cooperative for refusing to return to work after his }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 licencia}{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sindical }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 was cancelled.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93The cooperative is still in diapers, but our s}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 indicato }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
has a long history, and it was the only thing we had to defend ourselves for many years,\'94 Vazquez, a stocky, bronze-faced man, t
old me as we talked in the midst of a large group of workers in a corner of a barren union hail, furnished with only a few benches and a blasting TV set.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\tx430\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 When the order came ending l}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 icencia sindi\-cal, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
I went to Lima and was granted an au\-dience with President Velasco, who was very cordial but said he had nothing to do with cooperatives. He asked me to give his greet\-
ings to the workers, which moved me very much. While I was away the administrator of the hacienda sent a letter to my house ex\-pelling me from the cooperative. My son re\-ceived it and my wife cried, because it said we would have to leave Cayalt\'ed
, along with two other union leaden. We called a }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sin\-dicato }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 meeting and decided to strike, giving three days\rquote  notice. The new administrators of Cayalt\'ed didn\rquote 
t believe we would strike, but the whole place was shut down. The de\-partmental prefect called us to his office in the city of Chiclayo to discuss the strike, and had us arrested in his office when a decision came from a labor judge declaring the strik
e illegal. But I had written already to President Velasco, and Velasco had sent Col. Manuel Segarra of the COAP to settle the strike by talking with the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sindicato }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
and cooperative leaders. We agreed that things would stay as they were until a new cooperative law is decreed.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx238\tx470\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Why do workers strike against their own cooperative? Because they don\rquote 
t have real powers to govern it. There are no union members on the Administrative Council. I am now proposing that the Administrative Council and the General Assembly of the cooperative automatically include the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sin\-
dicato }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 with voice but not vote. Our workers are not able to discuss things with people with university degrees. The engineers know technology and know how to talk while we have many illiterates. We don\rquote t have
 enough education to be managers. Absolutely not. But our sons will be managers of Cayalt\'ed.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx238\tx470\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx238\tx470\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 IV
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx1360\faauto\outlinelevel0\rin0\lin0\itap0 \i\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {\b The Brave Bulls
\par }\pard\plain \qc \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx1360\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\i\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 THE FACE OF General Juan Velasco Al\-varado is the face of thousands of men who sit behind small, linoleum-covered desks at army barracks throu
ghout Latin America. There is nothing in the earlier career of President Velasco that differs from that of the great mass of }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
officers climbing the steps of the military bureaucracy; some who have known General Velasco throughout his army career say there has never been any\-thing special about him to make him stand out as a reformer or revolutionary. The suc\-
cessful army officer is an ingrained bureau\-crat. Since in Latin America there are few wars and always far too few troop commands for the number
 of officers seeking them, so superfluous diplomatic posts and staff jobs with fancy titles and no real purpose have to be invented, along with early retirement at full pay, to placate this important political constituency.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 In an early presidential speech, Velasco said \'93
we military men are not beginning now to learn about Peru; we have learned and explored it throughout our careers, from frontier to frontier.\'94 Yet, quite typically of the officer corps, only 5 of Velasco\rquote s 35 years in the army were spent in 
the provinces, and none of them in the sierra, Peru\rquote s most de\-pressed and populous region. He is a shy, passionate, moon-faced man who makes great displays of courtliness to the endless stream of visitors to his office in the Presi\-
dential Palace, though h
e prefers the language and customs of an army barracks. He sweats and fidgets profusely during his televised speeches, making them a droning agony both for the speaker and his audience, despite the soaring prose prepared for him by an excellent team of ci
vilian speechwriters. General Velasco became president because he was senior commanding officer of the army when the army executed an \'93institu\-tional\'94 coup d\rquote \'e9tat on October 3, 1968\emdash  three months before his scheduled retire\-ment
\emdash to make him the visible head and main spokesman of what journalists call the \'93Peruvian Military Revolution.\'94
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Velasco\rquote 
s biography is revealing, in view of the transformations undergone by the Peruvian military in recent decades. He was born in 1909 in the northern coastal city of Piur
a, at a time when Chinese coolie labor in the nearby cotton plantations was being replaced by Indians recruited in the sierra. Near Piura a Standard Oil subsidiary, the International Petroleum Co. (IPC), was building new installations\emdash 
with segregated housing for foreign and Peruvian personnel \emdash to which Velasco was to send army troops in order to nationalize it within a week of as\-suming the presidency, causing the worst crisis in the history of U.S.-Peruvian rela\-tions.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Velasco\rquote s father was a poor sanitary In\-spector in a suburb of Piura, but even this miserable job was subject to political pres\-
sures and he was fired after one of the many changes of government in the early 1930s. A high school classmate told me that young Velasco \'93had only one suit and one 
pair of shoes. He was clean but withdrawn, friendly but intimate with nobody, with a large col\-lection of sports clippings and a great will to survive. He studied much, but had poor grades.\'94
 One of his teachers at the Colegio San Miguel in Piura, Hildebrando Castro Pozo, later became famous as a leader of the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 indigenista }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
movement in Peruvian politics and letters that romanticized Indian com\-munal traditions and agitated for social re\-form. When Velasco finished high school he could not enter Chorillos, Peru\rquote 
s military academy because he lacked the money to buy a uniform and a sword. One classmate said Velasco entered the army as a private and saved enough from his meager salary\emdash plus tips from running errands and shining shoes\emdash 
to enter Chorillos the following year.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx391\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 1930, the year he entered Chorillos, a }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 zambo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
colonel from Piura, Luis Miguel Sanchez Cerro, led a provincial rebellion that ousted the 11-year Legu\'eda dictatorship and launched Peru into a new era of conflict, en\-livened by recently imported Marxist and fascist social theories. 1932, Velasco
\rquote s third year at Chorillos, the bloody APRA uprising occurred in Trujillo and the slaughter of the 11 army officers taken hostage there was to engender hatreds that have never been erased. In 1933, Velasco\rquote s last 
year at Chorillos, Sanchez Cerro was assassinated, allegedly by an }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Aprista, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 making way for an\-other six years of military dictatorship. Ve\-lasco\rquote 
s first important post on the bureau\-cratic ladder of the army was director of Chorillos from 1950 to 1953 under the vio\-lently anti-APRA dictatorship of General Manuel Odr\'eda (1948\emdash 56). One of Velasco\rquote 
s main tasks as head of Chorillos was to in\-still in the cadets a fervent fear and hatred of APRA, and Velasco had to be especially convincing in this role because he was mar\-
ried to the clever and beautiful daughter of an APRA leader from Piura. In 1950}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 a new command school for senior officers called CAEM }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
(Centro de Altos Estudios Militares) }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 was founded to engage generals and colonels in a year of full-time study of Peru\rquote s social and economic problems. In future years CAEM would serve as a meeting ground be\-
tween some of Peru\rquote s ablest officers and the leftist politicians and intellectuals who lec\-tured there. Both this ideological }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 aggiorna\-mento }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 of the Peruvian militar
y and its hatred of APRA prepared the ground for the coup d\rquote \'e9tat of October 1968.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Military life as an agency of social mobil\-
ity is as old as armies themselves. This social dynamism is reflected in the biographies of President Velasco and many other Peruvian military leaders, the army being the image, roughly speaking, of modem Peruvian so\-ciety in that the officers are }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizos, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 the sergeants are }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cholos }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 and the privates are Indians. Most army officers come from mid\-dle class }{
\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 mestizo }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 families of provincial towns, and stand somewhat uncomfortably apart both from the great mass of Indians and }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 cholos }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 beneath them and families of whiter skin that form the traditional landholding and commercial oligarchy. Of Peru\rquote s gen\-erals serving in the period 1955\emdash 65, 56 per\-
cent were born either in the sierra or the Amazon region, while 94 percent of the di\-rectors of Peru\rquote s largest corporations in the same period were born in Lima or elsewhere on the coast.}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The impact of the army of\-ficer corps on the profits and practices o
f these corporate directorates since 1968 is now a matter of historical record. Since the Wars of Independence, many men of low social origins have risen to positions of power in Peru, especially through the army. But never before have the provinces desce
nded in mass upon the capital to transform the na\-tion\rquote s social structure, nor has the provincial middle class ever before fused with such great effect its pretentions of nationalism and so\-cial reform.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 One of the curious things about the \'93in\-stitutional\'94 military coup of 1968 that created the \'93Revolutionary government\'94
 is that it was plotted and executed by a small elite of army Intelligence and Ranger officers who had played key roles in suppression of the 1965\emdash 66 guerrilla uprising. As far as I could dete
rmine, none of the other branches of the armed forces were directly involved, although there had been coup rumors for several weeks. The navy and air force had no choice but to fall in line when confronted with the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
fait accompli. }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The new regime moved quickly to consolidate its military and popular support. It brought high-ranking of\-
ficers from the navy and air force into cabinet and other high posts and, six days after the coup, seized IPC\rquote s Talara refinery, thus end\-ing by fiat }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 50 }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 years of angry litigatio
n and recrimination\emdash after the agrarian reform, the most popular measure taken by the \'93Revolutionary government.\'94
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {Several months later, one of the Peruvian army\rquote 
s leading counterinsurgency specialists, a cultivated officer with a law degree who personally ushered the once-popular Presi\-dent Belaunde out of the Presidential Palace in Lima at 5 KM. on October 3, 1968, re\-
ceived me in his office in the Palace, where he was serving in the brain trust of 11 In\-telligence colonels that guides the reform movement in Peru today.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par There is an international conspiracy to over\-throw this government [he told me]. We are accused abroad of being Communists be\-cause we are not operating in a constitutional democratic system and}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 want profound changes. It is true that army officers were forbidden to read Marx and Mao Tse-ung before, and now they are not. I first studied Marxism in France during the 1950s}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 while taking courses at a French army counterin\-surgency school. In 1962, after returning to Peru, I was sent to La Convenci\'f3n Valley near Cuzco when the peasants rebelled un\-
der Hugo Blanco. Another young colonel was sent to the central sierra to talk with the Indian communities that had invaded the great sheep ranches to obtain land. I realized how deep the injustices were and how ex\-
plosive they could be if they continued. Most of the }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 hacendados }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 had fled La Conven\-ci\'f3n, and Peru\rquote 
s first land reform law was decreed in 1963 specifically to divide the land in the valley and end forced labor. We came to realize that the whole nat
ion needed the same treatment if we were to survive in peace. So far we have changed things without bloodshed.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {Cause, Kind, and Progress of the Military Coup}{\b0 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\b\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 THE REAL CAUSES of the military coup are more complex. The Belaunde regime was probably the most progressive to date in Pe\-ruvian history, and during its five years in office, both per capita income and school en\-
rolments increased by 50 percent, agrarian reform was begun, Peru\rquote s wretched highway system underwent a huge expansion, and the oligarchic private banks were stripped of their tax-collecting functions and their con\-
trol of the Central Bank. A handsome archi\-tect with a bold program of social reform, Belaunde was supported by the military in the 1963 election after the army had stopped the co
unting of ballots and seized power the year before, when it appeared that Haya de la Torre and APRA would win the 1962 election by a narrow margin. Because of his military backing and the anti-APRA fervor in his own }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
Acci\'f3n Popular }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 party and among his Christian Democratic allies, Belaunde was unable to form a parliamentary affiance with APRA, which joined in an \'93impossible\'94
 pact of its own with the right-wing forces of ex-dictator Manuel Odr\'eda that had perse\-cuted APRA for many years.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Belaunde\rquote s reform program was faced from the beginning with a hostile congres\-sional majority; parliamentary votes of cen\-
sure forced some 20 cabinet changes in five years. The histrionic architect quickly lost the will to fight; shortly after his inaugura\-tion Haya de la Torre, now a toothless old man, contemptuously called Belaunde a }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 se
\'f1orito\emdash a }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 spoiled son of the aristocracy. The long political stalemate was complicated by a series of contraband scandals involving prominent military officers and politicians and by a financial c
risis leading to a 50 per\-cent devaluation of the Peruvian sol in 1967. This caused both Belaunde\rquote 
s party and his Christian Democratic allies to split in half, forcing the greatly weakened government to reach an understanding with APRA that cleared the way
 for what would have been an easy victory for Haya de la Torre in the presidential elections set for 1969. At this point the military made its move.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx391\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 A few days after the coup, army troops surrounded the vacant building of Congress in downtown Lima and remo
ved a large quantity of documents, including a list of high-ranking officers implicated in the contraband scandals that had shaken the Be\-
launde regime. Among those involved were the navy minister, the naval intelligence chief, and the director of the PIP (Peru\rquote s FBI). The navy minister and the PIP director were forced to resign, but the naval intelligence chief survived to head a 
\'93moralization\'94 purge of the Finance Ministry and the Central Bank that deprived Peru of some of its best econo\-mists.}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Two weeks 
after the documents were removed from Congress, a press conference was called by the new interior and police minister, General Armando Artola, a bald, beefy, blustering cavalry officer in dark glasses who was chief of Army Intelligence during the 1965
\emdash 66 guerrilla insurrection. The son of a cabinet minister in Odr\'eda\rquote s military dictatorship, Artola announced at his press conference a new \'93moralization\'94 campaign to purify official life, and de\-nounced the \'93golden bureaucracy
\'94 in the dissolved Congress that included flagrant payroll padding and globetrotting at govern\-ment expense. (When last May\rquote s earthquake occurred, a large expedition of military of\-ficers was in Mexico City at government ex\-
pense to watch Peru play in the World Cup soccer matches. Ostensibly heading the dele\-gation was General Artola himself; but when the earthquake broke he could not be located in Mexico and finally was traced to a pent\-
house suite at the Hotel Lido in Miami Beach.)
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Six months after the coup, the magazine }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Caretas, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 which had
 relentlessly exposed the contraband scandals in the Belaunde regime, reported and commented on a new \'93decree-law\'94 enabling the government to summarily purge army generals who were out of line politically, as well as one of the four un\-
publicized pay raises that the military had received since taking power. The whole issue of }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Caretas }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 was confiscated and its independ\-
ent editor, Enrique Zileri Gibson, deported from the country. The }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Caretas }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 article had criticized the army pay raises as being \'93in\-elegant, unju
st, and politically negative in view of the recent extension of the salary freeze of other public employees for economy reasons.\'94
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Otherwise the \'93Revolutionary govern\-ment\'94 has been able to muzzle and intimidate the Peruvian press quite thoroughly. Two of t
he Lima dailies have been taken over outright, and the rest have been so cowed by a stringent new press law and close supervision by the Interior Ministry that they refrain from reporting stories that might em\-
barrass the government, like the killings at Carhuaz or the strikes at the expropriated sugar haciendas. The most notorious case was the expropriation of the tabloid }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Expreso, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
owned by Belaunde\rquote s ex-finance minister, which was turned into a workers\rquote  coopera\-tive with a government-appointed manager; the leftist intellectuals who now edit }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Expreso }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 each assigned themselves three or four sala\-ries drawn in the name of relatives, and have turned the paper into a servile official organ.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Last November, when }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Caretas }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 sharply cri\-ticized economic policy and accuse
d the \'93Revolutionary government\'94 of censoring the mails, citing as an example Artola\rquote s read\-
ing aloud of intercepted letters at a press conference, the magazine was attacked from three sides: its offices in downtown Lima were taken over by 15 government tax in\-
vestigators, and Zileri, who had been allowed to return from his 1969 exile, was accused of obscenity and \'93crime against press free\-dom\'94 by the Interior Ministry and the at\-
torney general. Although the government did not refute the charges of mail censorship, Zileri was found guilty, fined a month\rquote s sal\-ary, and given a six-month suspended sen\-tence subject to \'93good behavior.\'94
\par These abuses, however, should not be\-cloud some of the extraordinary changes that the social conscience of the military has un\-dergone in recent years. In the late 1950s, politicians began to talk of a \'93Nasserist\'94
 trend in the armed forces, suggesting a move\-ment akin to the militant lower-middle-class Egyptian officers who in 1952 overthrew King Farouk and set up a reformist regime trumpeting a new \'93Arab socialism.\'94
 In 1958 the Peruvian army began to strengthen its intelligence apparatus to deal with the wave of strikes and street disturbances that, in 1956, followed the end of an eight-year mili\-tary dictatorship and the resumption there\-
after of free trade union activity. The general who directed these intelligence operations for the next four years told me recently: \'93The army was getting tired of being called in to put down the revolts of starving peasants. We were worried about
 Communism, and we wanted to know who else was behind these uprisings. But we began to tell the landlords and politicians that this dirty work was no longer for us.\'94
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Over the past decade, the Peruvian army has come to be known as one of the most profession
al in Latin America. Part of this, undoubtedly, is due to the sharp competition among the 3,500 officers to fill the few top positions (160 colonelcies and 39 general\-ships) available to those rising from the junior ranks. This in turn has led to an em\-
phasis on advanced study and merit as a key to promotion, with Peru having, for example, sent more military personnel to study in the United States than any other hemispheric republic save Brazil, which has an army roughly three times its size.}{
\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The close rela\-
tionship with the U.S. military establishment has generated, not surprisingly, an unusually strong love-hate syndrome among Peruvian officers, which is intensified by their depen\-dence on U.S. handouts and bargain sales of surplus military equipment. 
\'93Although the surplus equipment we have been receiving from the United States may be obsolete by the standards of your army,\'94 a ranking cabinet officer said in an interview, \'93they are instru\-
ments of modernization for us, and require a kind of industrial organization that Peru\-
vians have never built before. This has made us drastically update the curriculum of our military academies, making the army the most modem national institution that Peru has today.\'94
\par The transformation of the Peruvian mili\-tary from a pro
vincial constabulary to an insurgent force challenging U.S. policy in Latin America probably would have been impossible without an increasingly intimate dialogue with leftist intellectuals, such as took place at the CAEM between high army officers and the
 leaders of the mini-parties of Peru\rquote s \'93Little Left\'94 who today serve as ad\-visers to the \'93Revolutionary government.\'94 Shortly after the 1968 coup, the military be\-
gan implementing a national development plan drafted at CAEM and submitted to Belaunde in 1965}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 . }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
The continuing dialogue between the military and leftist intellectuals gained momentum after Velasco\rquote s speech proclaiming the new agrarian reform.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx300\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Around this time, members of a tiny Marx\-ist party involved in the 1965\emdash 66 guerrilla uprising visited the Pa
lace to talk with a group of colonels to offer their support. According to one of those present, a spokesman for the visitors said, \'93We Marxists support your struggle for Peru\rquote s national indepen\-
dence, even if it is nothing more than that, because we know it will carry you outside the capitalist system.\'94 One of the colonels replied:
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx300\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {Our decision to fight for national independ\-
ence is irreversible. We are not socialists. But we would not reject such a solution if it were revealed to be absolutely necessary.
 We will not, however, allow this process of change to be controlled by Marxists in view of the experience of other socialist societies in depriving personal liberty. We don\rquote t plan to persecute Marxists, but we are men of Christian philosophy.

\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx300\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par Peru\rquote s \'93Revolutionary government\'94 fol\-lows the pattern of many military dictator\-ships of incorporating into their entourage many mini-parties of the Right or Left while denying any role to the larger parties dis\-
lodged by the military coup. This only par\-tially explains the profound and wide-spread indifference of the great majority of Peru\-vians that I observed during seven months of traveling through the country, to the appar\-
ently radical changes in their society being decreed from above by the \'93Revolutionary government.\'94 This indifference is all the more striking to a journalist who, on previous trips to Cuba, Guatemala, Santo Domingo, Vene\-
zuela and most recently Chile, has seen many thousands of people engaged in passionate conflict when such changes were in the air. This widespread passivity may be just an\-other instance of the limited political partici\-
pation that always has been an ingrained feature of Peruvian society. It was only in 1931 that Peru had its first real general elec\-tion, and there were only 300
,000 voters that year in a population of roughly 5 million. The electorate grew fivefold over the next three decades, but the literacy requirement kept it to roughly one-fourth the voting-age popula\-
tion, and the election results were often vetoed by military coups. As }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Caretas }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 ob\-served in 1968,
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {Some said recently when the October 3 coup occurred: \'93It had to happen!\'94
 This to us is nonsense. The people learn from their own experience, and those who aspire to guide the people should ponder well what they say
. To suppose that only the military can solve our problems is to condemn al civilians eternally to the status of children, and to argue that in practice democracy is worth\-
less... . If our brief democratic experiences have led to disaster it has been because of the truly exasperating lack of precisely this democratic experience. Military coups do not suppress this evil, but nourish its cause.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx340\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 For all the overwhelming popular ap\-proval that accompanied the decreeing of the agrarian reform or the nationaliza
tion of IPC, the military regime has been increas\-ingly aware that it is operating in a political void. Its political rallies have had the ring of a packaged spectacle. In his speech last Octo\-ber a Lima\rquote 
s Plaza de Armas in observance of the military\rquote s second anniversary in power, Velasco admitted before one of those huge packaged crowds that \'93it has not been pos\-
sible during this first stage to articulate an organized and massive popular support for the Revolution, nor to resolve completely the fundamental problem of the effective partici\-pation of the people in the revolutionary process.\'94
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx391\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 A brilliant Peruvian general later told me:
\par 
\par One of our greatest defects is the military habit of ordering and expecting to be blindly obeyed. This just doesn\rquote t happen in
 society at large. We deeply want to transfer power to the people, but we have not been able to find a way of doing this. To call elections without first carrying out our structural re\-forms, without first putting real power in the people\rquote 
s hands through the agrarian re\-form and the Industrial Community, would just bring us back to the political farces of the past without any real improvement in Peruvian society. We admit that our great\-
est political problem is to give a real role to the people in the process that is going on right now.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx260\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx805\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {Audacious New Industrial Laws
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx805\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 THIS POLITICAL ISOLATION, however, has not inhibited the military from under\-
taking some original social experiments. The most striking of these is the total reorganiza\-tion of Peruvian manufacturing production units into Industrial Communities, providing for gradual transfer of ownership and execu\-
tive control to the workers. The two industrial laws decreed in late 1970 are among the most audacious pieces of economic legislation in Latin-American history.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The General Law of Industries (1) re\-
serves all basic, heavy industry for the public sector; (2) gives factories a series of state-controlled tax and credit incentives for growth along planned lines; (3) distributes among workers 10 percent of net profits be\-
fore taxes; (4) creates the Industrial Com\-munity, composed of all the firm\rquote s employees, including the old management; (5)}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
devotes 15 percent of annual profits to the gradual acquisition of half the company\rquote s stock by the employees joined together in the Indus\-
trial Community; (6) provides progressive participation by the workers in management decisions as their stock ownership increases; (7) requires wholly-owned subsidiaries of foreign corporations to contract with the state fixing a term, 
after recovery of invest\-ment and a reasonable profit, for which foreign ownership would be reduced to one-third. Foreign interests in partnership with Peruvian capital can keep up to 49 percent.
\par Explaining these innovations to a meeting of business executives last November, Vel\-asco stressed that \'93
we know that this will be a painful, slow and difficult labor.... Until the beginning of the Nationalist revolution, Peru was subjected to the double and para\-lyzing pressure of underdevelopment and imperialism.\'94 He defined imperialism as \'93
the domination exercised by foreign capital and technology over a society with an incipient and embryonic economy,\'94 adding that
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {the Revolutionary government considers that the final source of wealth is labor\'85. The revolutionary
 laws in the industrial sector establish the participation of labor in the profits, management, and ownership of busi\-nesses. In pauperized countries like Peru, where the immense majority of people can\-
not save, to reject this point of view and to maintain that savings and not labor is the generator of wealth means indefinitely sus\-
taining the poverty and backwardness of the great marginal social sectors and, therefore, to condemn the country as a whole to eternal underdevelopment.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par The new industrial laws\emdash taken together with the agrarian reform and the other new statutes governing the main sectors of fish-meal and mining as well as the \'93salami tactics\'94 being used to nationalize gradually the private banks\emdash 
bring into clear focus the effort to reorganize the 
Peruvian economy along statist and nationalist lines. The basic industries will be in state hands, and thus principal exports will be marketed abroad by government corporations. Agriculture and manufacturing will be concentrated in co\-
operative-type organizations subject to state fiscal and credit control, while artisan crafts and petty commerce would remain largely in private hands to absorb the great mass of underemployed at the fringes of the economy.
\par \'93It is an old story for the economy to be divided in state, cooperative, and private sec\-tors,\'94 observed one of Pew\rquote s leading sociolo\-gists. \'93It comes essentially from two related sources: Christian Democracy and the Spanish fascists.
\'94 This, however, may prove a shallow judgment. One of the generals re\-sponsible for passage of the Industrial Law told me recently that
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {
in decreeing this statute we knew we were taking a great risk. An initial draft of the law, that was pretty bad, was published by the Ministry of Industries for public discus\-sion. After that we
 went through four more drafts in four months of intensive work on the law. The fate of the Industrial Commu\-nity is now in the hands of the people: the workers, union leaders, factory managers and owners. If they work together construc\-
tively, the Industrial Community will be a success. After all, it is in the interests of everyone to work with greater discipline and efficiency to maximize profits for all. If they don\rquote 
t work together, the old owner may find it more convenient to sell his remaining half to the Industrial Community. Then the sys\-tem would change from co-management to worker management.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par None of these implications have been lost on Peru\rquote s business executives. New invest\-ment has dried up almost completely over the past two years despite assurance from the military that there is an important role for private enterprise in Peru
\rquote s \'93New Industrial Society.\'94 To appreciate the staggering obsta\-cles to the achievement of this goal, it might be well to look at the structure of the Peru\-vian industrial 
sector, which is similar to that of most developing countries. According to the 1963 manufacturing census, 82 percent of the 23,308 factories in Peru had fewer than five workers. Of the rest, two-thirds were located in Lima, mainly clothing and textile fa
ctories with imported second-hand machinery owned by Italians and East European Jews,}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
and food-processing plants in the process of rapid absorption by large U.S. corporations, as they are in the rest of Latin America. Under past governments\rquote  import-substitu
tion policies, scores of other factories produce foreign-patented consumer goods under expensive royalty arrangements. Never\-theless, the manufacturing sector has contributed spectacularly in recent decades to Peru\rquote 
s economic growth, increasing its prod\-uct at an annual average of 9.3 percent be\-tween 1950 and 1967 and its blue-collar work force at nearly the same rate. This is quite a contribution to an economy with chronically high unemployment aggra\-
vated by rapid urbanization and a popula\-tion explosion that generates massive pres\-sures on the job market each year.
\par As expected, Ford and General Motors and the First National City Bank have with\-drawn from Peru, and local businessmen have not only been shy of making new in\-vestments of their own money but 
also of accepting easy credit from the government. Their complaint against the new Industrial Law is less of sharing profits with their work\-
ers than of giving up executive control of their own businesses. Under the new law, the embryonic Industrial Commun
ities have been organized and registered within 60 days of the decree. Some industrialists have left the country, but others have gone along philo\-sophically, as reflected in this joke told by a leading Jewish businessman at the end of the executives
\rquote  meeting addressed last November by General Velasco:
\par A king had summoned his people and showed them a donkey, ordering them to teach it how to talk. If they did not, many people would be killed. The people did not know what to do until a rabbi spoke up, ask\-ing
 the people to leave things in his hands; he would solve the problem. The rabbi went to the king and said: \'93
Your majesty, I will teach your donkey to talk, and even give speeches, when I finish. I pledge my life as security. But, Your Majesty, if it takes a hu\-
man being four or five years to learn to speak correctly, it should take your illustrious burro roughly 15 years. Then, there will be some expenses of feeding him and for my full-time work, etc. If you will sign this contract, Your Majesty....\'93 When t
he rabbi told the elders of the town of his contract, they said: \'93You\rquote re crazy! They\rquote ll kill you!\'94 \'93That may be true,\'94 the rabbi answered. \'93
But I see it this way: In 15 years the king could die. In 15 years the donkey could die. Or per\-haps in 15 years the burro might even learn how to talk.\'94 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 This wait-and-see attitude might well be advisable for many other people. Like Mexico during the l930s, Peru today is go\-
ing through a period of extraordinary social and economic reorganization to achieve greater soci
al justice. While these changes may be subject to retraction or modification later on, the social pressures that impelled them have influenced many governments and seem to be a permanent part of the Peruvian scene. In response to such pressures Peru
\rquote s educational expenditures, for example, in\-creased tenfold between 1955}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
and 1965, from 13 to 29 percent of the government budget, while public spending as a whole leaped from 11 to 20 percent of GNP.}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The important thing about the present \'93Revolu\-
tionary government\'94 is that it attempts in\-novative solutions to the old problems of foreign domination and economic inequality that undoubtedly will leave some lasting benefits for the Peruvian people\emdash 
as well as the disillusion of some failed experiments. It would be ideal if these reforms were carried out with the kind of massive popular support enjoyed by the Mexican Revolution, but this is not the case.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 On the other hand, the economic disloca\-tions proceeding from the changes decreed by the \'93Revolutionary government\'94 
have been cushioned by a boom in export com\-modities that in 1970 brought Peru\rquote 
s foreign exchange earnings above the $1 billion mark for the first tine. Roughly 85 percent of these earnings were in minerals and fishmeal, which under new legislation are bei
ng marketed abroad by state corporations. It is in this critical field of negotiating better terms of trade with the \'93metropolitan powers\'94 that Peru, along with the other principal com\-
modity-exporting nations of the Third World, is making some of its most dramatic moves. The great problem of these countries, as al\-ways, is to find or train enough competent managers, bureaucrats, negotiators, and tech\-
nicians to fully develop and implement these policies, and to obtain enough capital and technology to bring these economic activities under their own control.
\par This issue of a nation\rquote s control of its own economy has recently been made an even more urgent question for most countries by the extraordinary growth of what has become known as the multinational corporation. Ac\-cording to Robert Heilbroner,

\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {71 of the top 126 [U.S.] industrial corpora\-
tions averaged one-third of their employment abroad.... In 1966, the U.S. exported $43 billion of goods and services to various parts of the world. In the same year, the value of United States overseas production \emdash 
that is, of goods and services made in U.S.-owned factories or establishments abroad\emdash came to $110 billion.... For all the talk (and the reality) of imperialist dom\-ination, most of the underdeveloped nations want d
omestic foreign investment, European and/or American, for a variety of reasons. The multinationals pay higher wages, keep more honest books, pay more taxes, and pro\-vide more managerial know-how and train\-
ing than do local industries. Moreover, they usuall
y provide better social services for their workers, and certainly provide fancy career opportunities for a favored few of the elite. They are, in addition, a main channel through which technology, developed in the West, can filter into backward nations. T
o be sure, the corporations typically send home more profits than the capital that they orig\-inally introduce into the \'93host\'94 country; but meanwhile that capital grows, providing jobs, improving productivity, and often contrib\-
uting to export earnings.\'94
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx260\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 As in the rest of the world, the most dra\-
matic expansion in Peru of the multinational corporations during the 1960s has been in the manufacturing industries. The profits are very high, often averaging 20 percent an\-nually, allowing a corporation to recover 
its original investment in less than five years.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Even so. the corporate contribution to the host economy consists largely of organiza\-tional skills and technology, since the multi\-
nationals more often than not borrow from local banks to finance the establishment of new plants,}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
and purchase machinery from the parent company at inflated prices. Until drastic measures were taken by the \'93Revolu\-tionary government,\'94 the Peruvian automo\-bile industry consisted of 13 foreign-owned assembly plants producing 17,000 
vehicles a year at roughly twice the U.S. retail price.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Take the case of General Motors del Peru. In GM\rquote 
s first year of assembling cars in Peru the company grossed three times its initial investment of $5}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 million, with its local pay\-roll and purchases amou
nting to 15 percent of sales, while its customs duties were halved as an incentive to assemble rather than im\-port cars.}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Both General Motors and Ford, the local industry\rquote 
s two largest producers, closed their Peru operations as the military regime reduced the number of auto assembly plants from 13 to 6, ordered the remaining companies to produce 70 percent of their components in Peru and, under the new In\-
dustrial Law, gave all foreign corporations the choice of taking local majority partners or leaving the country.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\keepn\nowidctlpar\tx249\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {Drastic Measures \emdash the Example of Cuajone
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx249\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
THESE DRASTIC if not desperate measures represent an effort by Peru and many other countries to influence the terms of their integration into the world economy. There is no doubt but that investments by large for\-
eign corporations increase both the scale and quality of economic activity. Yet they do so with profit margins that in overall terms seem like economic banditry, and greatly diminish the powers of national decision over the often conflicting prio
rities of consumer demand and capital accumulation. The multinational corporations are to the political economy of Latin America today what the \'93trusts\'94 were to that of the United States at the beginning of this century\emdash 
with the key difference that at least in the U.S. the great corporations generated a providential capital accumula\-
tion within its national frontiers. The drain of capital from the poorer countries to the richer ones, as recorded in U.S. Commerce Department statistics, is astounding. Between 1950 and 1965}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{
\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 U.S. private companies in\-vested $297 million in Peru and during the same period withdrew $628 million in divi\-dends, interest, and other remittances, while dollar accounts of Peruvians in the United States tripled.}{
\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The Economist }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 estimated the drain of capital from Latin America by mu\-
tual funds alone at $450 million annually, equal to all World Bank loans to the region through 1968 and hail the area\rquote s balance of payments deficit.}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 This is why the \'93Revo
\-lutionary government\'94 last May decreed one of the world\rquote s tightest exchange control sys\-tems. While countries like Peru must fight the erosion of their export earnings by this dol\-
lar drain, they badly need the organizational and technical skills of the great foreign cor\-porations. Pen\rquote s finance minister told an audience of American businessmen in March that Peru will need $700 million in foreign investment by 1975.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The great example of this problem is Cuajone, which will be one of the world\rquote s largest copper mines, that lies nearly 12,000 feet hi
gh in the desert mountains of south\-ern Peru. Cuajone is a giant open-pit mine containing 470 million tons of ore, capable of yielding 140,000 tons a year of near-pure \'93blister\'94 copper. It will cost roughly $355}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  
}{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 million to bring Cuajone into production, a sum equal to all accumulated U.S. invest\-
ment in Peru through 1956 and nearly twice all American investment since then. This enormous investment means 200-ton trucks and giant steam shovels able to remove the 200 million tons of earth that cover the ore de
posit, $50 million to build railways and tunnels\emdash including one tunnel 10 miles long\emdash leading from the mine to a new concen\-trating plant as well as $28 million for two new towns. Cuajone will also be one of the world\rquote 
s most automated mines, with com\-puters used for such varied tasks as eval\-uating exploration data, calculating ore re\-
serves, production scheduling, and complex investment analysis. Seen for the near future are automated rotary drills with digitized re\-cording of data for computer calculation, elimination of draftsmen by computer-plot\-
ters, and conversing with computers in con\-ventional language.
\par One of the most revolutionary things about Cuajone is the contract between the \'93Revolutionary government\'94 and the U.S.-owned Southern Peru Copper Corpo
ration to develop the mine. It was signed in December 1969, after a critical phase of what can only be called a continuing poker game for tre\-
mendous stakes between U.S. and Peruvian interests. Southern Peru Copper was formed in the early 1950s to exploit the neighboring Toquepala mine, and exercised options on Cuajone and Quellavico, the other two un\-
exploited deposits in what should become the world\rquote s biggest copper-mining complex. The Belaunde regime had lined up roughly $700 million in new investment to
 bring several untapped copper deposits into production. When Belaunde was ousted, the mining com\-
panies held back on their investments and resisted polite pressures to go ahead until the leftist-nationalist Minister of Mines General Jorge Fernandez Maldonado delivered the companies an ultimatum: develop all un\-
exploited concessions, or the mines would revert to the state. Within three months the Cuajone contract was signed, despite furious protests by leftist supporters of the \'93Revolu\-tionary government\'94 w
ho urged exploitation of the mine by the state itself.
\par The Cuajone contract, if fulfilled, will be a major breakthrough in the relations be\-tween nations producing and consuming raw materials. The pressures for better terms of trade for producing companies
 have been strongest in copper and oil, and have left the consuming nations in a bad mood. Never\-theless, not only does the new Cuajone con\-tract submit the foreign mining enterprise to the highest degree of state control and taxa\-
tion ever imposed in Peru, but it gives the state the option to refine and market the copper abroad, making the arrangement ap\-pear more like the \'93service contracts\'94 now becoming popular in the oil industry.}{\lang1033\langfe1046\super\langnp1033  
}{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 De\-spite the enormity of the investment needed to bring Cuajone into production, the con\-tract will be valid only \'93during the period required for the recuperation of the invest\-
ment, which may not exceed 10 years counted as from the date of the start of mining exploitation operations.\'94 Again, if Southern Peru does not arrange financing for the entire $350}{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033  }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
million investment by June 1971, the concession will revert to the state.
\par That an American company in Peru will swallow such tough terms to retain a mining concession marks a new era in economic relations; but there is more to it than that. Peru, Chile, Zambia, and the Congo together produce 72 percent of the world\rquote 
s export copper, a demand nearly doubled between 1960 and 1967 under the artificial stimulus of the Vietnam war. Since Zambia and the Congo recently nationalized their copper de\-
posits and Chile is clearly about to do so, Peru is the last major supplying country open to direct operations by foreign companies. According to an American writer,
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx340\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 1969 was a frightening year for the great international copper companies. Wit
h nationalization in Zambia and an agreement for nationalization of Anaconda in Chile, plus the insecurity about the direction of change in Peru, most companies had to be most cautious in planning investments for the 1970\rquote 
s.... Thus the biggest companies are reorienting their investment programs toward secure\'94 geographic regions\emdash 
plus great new copper discoveries in the U.S. and Canada. There is also a growing flow of funds toward Australia, the Philippines, Mexico, India, Spain, and Yugoslavia. And not only
 the traditional U.S. and British companies are moving their money into these \'93secure\'94 areas; the more aggressive Japanese and European companies are doing the same.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 So the copper companies in Peru may sim\-ply be stalling for time, while political con\-dit
ions turn to their advantage and new sources of supply are developed.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx340\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The poker game over Cuajone could in\-volve the very survival of the \'93Revolutionary government.\'94
 The game runs this way: since the $215 million Toquepala project of the l950s and the even larger U.S. copper con\-
cessions in Chile could not have been brought into production without huge loans from the U.S. government, it is extremely doubtful that Southern Peru will find the $350 million financing assets as required before the June 1971 dead
line. President Nixon could just as well have been alluding to Peru, or the severe restrictions imposed last December on foreign companies by five nations of the new Andean Common Market, as well as the present jockeying over com\-
pensation for the U.S. copper companies in Chile, when he said last February in his \'93State of the World\'94 message:
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx311\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
The 1970 election of a Socialist President [in Chile] may have profound implications not only for its people but for the Inter-American system as well. The Government\rquote 
s legitimacy is not in question, but its ideology is likely to influence its actions.\'85 We do not seek confrontations with any govern\-
ment. But those which display unremitting hostility cannot expect our assistance. Many governmental disputes flow from pres\-
sures against foreign private investment. Such investment plays a constructive role in development, for no government or public agency has the vast resources required for even basic development goals. It is clearly for each country to decide its condition
s for foreign investment, just as it is for each in\-vestor to decide what conditions provide adequate security and incentives. The chal\-lenge for governments and investors is to de\-
velop new approaches which satisfy the needs of both. We ask only that our citizens be treated fairly in accordance with interna\-tional law.
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 The copper companies could deal a severe blow to the military regime by throwing the Cuajone concession back in the govern\-ment\rquote 
s lap. Before the contract was signed, the Peruvians approached the Russians for help to exploit Cuajone themselves. Accord\-ing to the progovernment magazine }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 OIGA, }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 \'93
the U.S.S.R. would be glad to lend the ma\-chinery for the exploitation of Cuajone by the state, but not the money needed for sala\-ries and purchases on 
the local market. These are the same conditions required by the United States for operations of this nature. For the Russians, it is not a question of aiding a country trying to end its depend\-ence, but a business deal like any other.\'94
 When pressed further by the Peruvians, the Russians said they should talk to the Ameri\-cans if they wanted better terms.
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx340\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 If southern Peru fails to get the money needed to finance Cuajone and the conces\-
sion reverts to the state, it could find itself losing the Toquepala concession as well. The \'93Revolutionary government\'94
 could argue that Cuajone and Toquepala are essentially part of the same mining complex, and that the exploitation of these deposits has been blocked by international pressures that both threaten national development and jeopar\-dize Peru\rquote 
s capacity to pay the $650 million in servicing of hard-currency loans that fall due between 1971 and 1974. Since the de\-velopment of Toquepala was financed by a $100 million loan from the U.S. Export-Import Bank, this could lead
 Peru into a confrontation with the Nixon administration much more dramatic and significant than that of expelling JPC from Peru. If this possibility is considered remote by some, they should bear in mind the view recently conveyed to me by one of Peru
\rquote s leading generals:
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \fi284\li426\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx334\faauto\rin0\lin426\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {
The Nixon administration has played its cards very intelligently in trying to diminish tensions over the nationalization of IPC. In fact, we would have preferred that Nixon apply the Hickenlooper amendment [cutting off all aid funds] so w
e could use it as a reason to radicalize our revolutionary proc\-ess.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx340\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\b\fs32\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 What of the Future?
\par }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 
\par }\pard \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx204\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 AT THIS STAGE, one cannot make con\-clusive judgments about this pro\-
cess. Evidently, the future of the so-called Peruvian Military Revolution will be de\-termined in part by the success or failure of other commodity-producing nations in dealing, jointly or separately, with the major industrial powers. Beyond that, Peru
\rquote s pain\-ful struggle with the economic and psychological burdens of feudalism and mercantil\-ism and foreign domination will depend on how much political support the \'93Revolu\-tionary government\'94
 can muster in the next year or two. The great trouble with military regimes, even reformist ones, is that they pro\-vide no long-term }{\i\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 political }{\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 solution. In most cas
es where the military seizes power, it truncates a nation\rquote s normal institutional growth and makes the army the leading poli\-tical party, a situation that does not generate popular support except in the rarest cases. Peru\rquote 
s military regime will have to take dras\-
tic steps to become one of these exceptions. The main political parties have survived in weakened form, and are free to applaud but not to oppose, and the same goes for the press and the general condition of political liberty under the present regime.

\par }\pard\plain \s18\qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx328\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1046 {
It has welcomed the support of the weak Moscow-line Communists, but has met a mixed reaction among the ten or so other Marxist groups in Peru, which count for little anyway. Although the economy is being reorganized along statist lines, a socialist revol
ution seems out of the question in Peru because the military cannot indefinitely re\-main a ruling party, and because it would impose immediate and intolerable sacrifices on the rising middle class of Lima, the clas\-sic Latin-American \'93primate city,
\'94 where population, wealth, and political power are heavily concentrated. Indeed, the army of\-ficers\rquote 
 corps comprises leading members of this middle class and would probably be among the first to oppose such measures as abolition of private schools, one of the mai
n pillars of class distinctions in Latin America, which Fidel Castro abolished in 1961 in one of the most decisive blows he dealt his mid\-
dle-class political opposition. Nevertheless, to continue its present reforms the military will have to deal ruthlessly with both intractable social problems and its own traditional fear of mass political mobilization. Other\-wise, the \'93
Revolutionary government\'94 can become increasingly repressive in coming years, with ennervating slogans of \'93revolu\-tion\'94 blaring over loudspeakers while the people are subjected to increasingly barren and restricted lives.
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi284\li0\ri0\sb120\nowidctlpar\tx323\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\lang1033\langfe1046\langnp1033 Like the leaders of the great majority of developing nations, Peru\rquote 
s rulers are torn be\-tween the conflicting needs of tighter organi\-zational control and the cultivation of the people. }{Success in achieving greater sover\-
eignty and distributive justice, however, will depend less on financing than on finding local substitutes for the two key instruments of the multinational corporations: organiza\-tion and technology. Whether 
the Peruvian people, and especially Peruvian bureaucrats, can run complex, automated mines and make a sweeping agrarian reform both economi\-cally productive and socially just, is the key to this extraordinary but still-undefined proc\-
ess of change. It may be Peru\rquote s last chance.
\par }}