{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1046\deflangfe1046{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Helvetica{\*\falt Arial};}
{\f12\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}New York{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f40\fnil\fcharset77\fprq0{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Palatino{\*\falt Book Antiqua};}{\f191\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f192\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f194\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f195\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f196\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}
{\f197\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f198\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\f5\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s4\ql \li354\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin354\itap0 \f12\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 
\sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 4;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext15 endnote text;}{\*\cs16 
\additive \super \sbasedon10 endnote reference;}{\s35\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4252\tqr\tx8504\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext35 header;}{\*\cs36 
\additive \fs16\up6 \sbasedon10 footnote reference;}{\s37\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 \sbasedon0 \snext37 footnote text;}{\*\cs40 \additive 
\sbasedon10 page number;}}{\info{\title Fernand Braudel Institute of World Economics}{\author EC}{\operator J.B.Bastos}{\creatim\yr2000\mo5\dy7\hr1\min24}{\revtim\yr2000\mo5\dy7\hr1\min24}{\version2}{\edmins3}{\nofpages16}{\nofwords4108}{\nofchars23418}
{\*\company MARCO POLO}{\nofcharsws28758}{\vern8249}}\widowctrl\enddoc\aenddoc\hyphhotz0\ftnnrlc\aftnnar\sprstsp\otblrul\brkfrm\sprstsm\truncex\nolead\msmcap\lytprtmet\hyphcaps0\horzdoc\fracwidth\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984
\dghshow0\dgvshow0\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\bdrrlswsix\nolnhtadjtbl \fet1\sectd \sbknone\linex0\endnhere\titlepg\sectdefaultcl {\header \pard\plain \s35\qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4252\tqr\tx8504\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40 \chpgn }{
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc \fi200\li0\ri-600\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin-600\lin0\itap0 
\f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40\fs42 Fernand Braudel Institute of World Economics}{\f40 
\par }\pard \qc \fi200\li0\ri-600\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin-600\lin0\itap0 {\f40\fs28 Associated with the Funda\'8d\'8bo Armando Alvares Penteado
\par }\pard \qc \fi200\li0\ri-714\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin-714\lin0\itap0 {\f40 Avenida Angelica 580 \bullet  01228 Higien\'97polis \bullet  S\'8bo Paulo, Brazil
\par }\pard \qc \fi200\li0\ri-794\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin-794\lin0\itap0 {\f40 Phones 676197/826-0103/825-2167 Fax 676197/825-2637
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40\fs48 
\par }\pard \qc \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40\fs48 Strategic and Political Dimensions of the Brazil-Bolivia Gas Pipeline Project
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40\fs36 
\par }\pard \qc \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40\fs36 Norman Gall
\par }{\f40\fs28 Executive Director
\par Fernand Braudel Institute of World Economics
\par }\pard \qc \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40\fs28 
\par }\pard \qc \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40\fs28 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40\fs28 
\par }\pard \qc \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40\fs28 March 1993
\par \page 
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 
The discovery of enough gas in Bolivia's Oriente to supply major markets on Brazil's Atlantic coast is an opportunity to strengthen the economic viability and modernization of both countries. Political and institutional difficulties inside Brazil, blockin
g most policy decisions, are delaying execution of this project. Many Bolivian leaders doubt that the forces driving the two
 countries toward making this deal can overcome these difficulties in time to avoid a collapse of Bolivia's foreign trade, placing at risk its political and economic stabilization of the past decade.
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 
This report focuses mainly on political risk inside Bolivia, during the life of the proposed project, in the context of Bolivia's historic relationship with Brazil and its recent economic and institutional development. We first will analyze Bolivia's revi
ved political economy as it developed since the hyperinfl
ation of the mid-1980s. We next will review the oil and gas politics of the South American heartland over the past six decades, evolving toward the umbrella agreement signed by Presidents Itamar Franco of Brazil and Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia on February
 17, 1993. We then will explore different kinds and degrees of political risk during construction and operation of the pipeline during the life of the contract. Finally, we will evaluate the strategic implications of the deal for both countries.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f5\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40\fs28\ulnone 1. Bolivia
's Political Economy of Stabilization and Foreign Aid 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40 
\par Since the hyperinflation of 1984-85, when consumer price increases peaked at an annual rate of 24,000%, Bolivia not only has avoided political and economic disintegration but also has advanced toward consolidating its democracy and a free market economy. 
 These advances will be tested by elections in June 1993 and by the need of the new government to deal with the collapse of Bolivia's official exports. 
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 In 1990-92 Bolivia's official trade balance suff
ered massive deterioration, of nearly 15% of gross domestic product (GDP). While exports fell by 27%, imports nearly doubled to breed a trade deficit of more than 10% of GDP. The ballooning trade deficit reflected two basic problems: (1) the long-term eco
nomic decline of the }{\i\f40 altiplano }{\f40 
 , the highland plateau stretching the length of Bolivia where most of its 6.5 million people are concentrated, and (2) the dominant role of foreign aid, which has become Bolivia's biggest industry. Against a trade deficit of 
nearly $600 million, foreign governments, private donors and international agencies in 1992 poured $750 million into the country, roughly 14% of GDP, enabling Bolivia not only to finance a surge of imports but to increase foreign exchange reserves as well
. Adding to this abundance of outside money is the cocaine trade by which, according to a new GATT study, illegal exports of coca paste earned another $700 million in 1992, breeding in the domestic economy a "Dutch disease" of excessive dollar inflows and
 an overvalued local currency. 
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 
Foreign aid and the cocaine trade are now the key to political and economic stability in Bolivia and to its relations with the outside world. In this context, the role of foreign governments (United States, Japan) and international agencies (World Bank, I
nter-American Development Bank) is critical both to building the pipeline to send gas to Brazil and to understanding the country's political and economic structure. The institutional apparatus for receiving international aid is
 far more developed, flexible and articulated than is the capacity for production and export. Since 1952, Bolivia has received more foreign aid per capita than any other country except Israel.}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain 
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  For details, see Norman Gall,  }{\i\f40 
El Alto de LaPaz: A Report to the  World Bank on the Origins and Prospects of Poverty in Bolivia .  }{\f40 La Paz-S\'8bo Paulo-Washingto: May 1985.}}}{\f40 
 Foreign donors feed a large share of the urban population and finance routine government functions such as road repairs, collection of statistics and epidemiological control. In these and other ways, they employ and develop a many of Bolivia's educated p
eople, who might emigrate otherwise for lack of other opportunit
ies. Since the New Economic Policy of President Victor Paz Estenssoro (1985-89) stopped the hyperinflation, foreign aid agencies have paid the salaries of consultants assuming senior staff roles in public administration, with key roles in making policy. T
he government of President Jaime Paz Zamora (1989-93) quickly realized that political stability and flows of foreign aid would be endangered if the preceding government's stabilization policies were not continued. The availability of food donations and fo
re
ign exchange in the cities has stimulated intense migration. Between the censuses of 1976 and 1992, the distribution of Bolivia's population shifted from 58% rural to 58% urban, with cities such as Sucre, El Alto, Cochabamba, Trinidad and Santa Cruz growi
ng by between 4% and 9% yearly, comparable to African rates of urbanization that are unprecedented in the world's history.
\par Flows of foreign aid have masked and cushioned the economic crisis bred by the secular decline of exports of minerals from the }{\i\f40 altiplano }{\f40 
, leading to a shift of economic activity to the lowlands east of the Andes that has been taking place since the 1950s. The proposed gas pipeline from Santa Cruz to S\'8b
o Paulo would consolidate this shift. Part of Bolivia's recent trade deficits are caused
 by further sharp declines in mineral exports from $641 million in 1980 to $356 million in 1991, a fall of 45% in nominal values and two-thirds in constant dollars. Exports of tin, the main foreign exchange earner in the 20th Century, peaked in 1929 at 4
7,000 tons of metallic content and fell since then to roughly 16,000 tons in 1992.}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  For an account of  the rise and fall of Bolivia's tin industry in this century, see Norman Gall, }{\i\f40 Bolivia: The Price of Tin. Part I; Pati\'96
o Mines and Enterprises. Part II: The Crisis  of Nationalization.  }{\f40 American Universities Field Staff Reports, 1974. }}}{\f40 
 Unable to develop other kinds of exports, Bolivia still depended on minerals for  42% of its exports in 1991, down from 62% in 1980. A key reason for Bolivia's pressing for the gas deal with Brazil is an expected fall in domestic production of liquid fue
ls in the teeth of rising demand, which would create a growing need for hard currency to pay for oil imports in the future.}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  Herbert M\'9fller Costas, }{\i\f40 El Contrato de Venta de Gas  al Brasil.  }{\f40 La Paz: M\'9fller & Associados, August  1992. M\'9f
ller is Bolivia's Minister of Energy and Hydrocarbons. }}}{\f40  The state oil company, Yacimientos Petroliferos F
iscales Bolivianos (YPFB), was expected to contribute, as taxes and direct transfers, 47% of the National Treasury's 1992 income in a country where other tax revenues amounted to only 8% GDP.}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain 
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  Fernando Urquidi, }{\i\f40 Bolivian Petroleum Industry Development and Outlook: 1991.}{
\f40   La Paz: United States Embassy, April 1992/p12; World Bank, }{\i\f40 Bolivia: Updating }{\f40  }{\i\f40 Economic Memorandum. }{\f40 Report No. 11123-BO. Washington: October 8, 1992/p8.}}}{\f40 
 A fall in oil production and gas revenues thus could be a major shock for Bolivia's tiny and volatile economy.  
\par The questions raised by shrinking exports and by excessive dependence on foreign aid are not being discussed in campaigns for election of a new President and Congress in June 1993. As in the 1985 and 1989 e
lections, the new President would be chosen by Congress among the three leading candidates, since none are likely to win an absolute majority of popular votes. Democratic practice is now the norm, after a turbulent history punctuated by roughly one milita
ry coup yearly in Bolivia's first 150 years as a republic, with nine Presidents in 1978-82 alone. Democratic practice has been institutionalized to the degree that there has been no serious military uprising in more than a decade. However, the political p
arties are weak. The underlying assumption of most politicians is that Bolivia can be sustained indefinitely by ample flows of foreign aid, despite today's turmoil in world politics and shifts in the interests of the donor nations.
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 
There are two main strategic considerations. First, while foreign aid has great impact on Bolivia's tiny economy, its has cost little in terms of the donor nations' resources. Second, aid to Bolivia over the past half-century brought stability and develop
ment to the South American 
heartland in response to a series of threats since the Great Depression, involving geopolitical rivalries at work in the Chaco War (1932-35) between Bolivia and Paraguay, the bloodiest conflict in the Americas since the U.S. Civil War and in Latin America
 since the Independence Wars; in German diplomacy and espionage in South America before and during World War II; in communist activity in Bolivia during the Cold War and in the drug wars of the 1970s and 1980s. Each of these threats prompted a new kind of
 U
nited States involvement. After confiscation of Standard Oil of New Jersey's tiny Bolivian operations in 1937, Secretary of State Cordell Hull told Bolivia's Ambassador to Washington that "in this dangerous, chaotic world situation there never was such a 
ripe plum dangled before a hungry person than Latin America appears to be to...lawless nations, hungry as wolves for vast territory with rich undeveloped resources such as South America possesses...."}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain 
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  Quoted in Bryce Wood, }{\i\f40 The Making of the Good Neighbor Policy. }{\f40 
New York; Norton,  1961/p181.}}}{\f40  
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 In those days, the crescent of sedimentary basins running east of the Andes, from the }{\i\f40 llanos }{\f40 
 of Venezuela and Colombia to the desert valleys of northwestern Argentina, was seen by some geologists and oil industry executives as a possible source of petroleum potentially as important as the Middle East.}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt 
\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  Albert J. Brokaw, "Oil," }{\i\f40 Foreign Affairs.  }{\f40 October 1927. }}}{
\f40 
 Standard Oil had been sending geological field parties into these remote regions since the early 1920s. While the big discoveries of Occidental and Shell in eastern Colombia and the Peruvian jungle in the late 1980s can be seen as long-delayed confirmati
on of e
arlier optimism, hopes of finding giant or super-giant fields in the lowlands of Bolivia and Paraguay and in Argentina's sub-Andean valleys have receded. However, while previous discoveries were marginal in size and marketability, improvements in technolo
gy and infrastructure now give Bolivia's modest gas reserves strategic importance for S\'8bo Paulo and other Brazilian cities and for Bolivia's own economic viability.  
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f5\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40\fs28\ulnone 
2. Geopolitics of Oil and Gas in South America's Interior}{\b0\f40\fs28\ulnone 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\b\f40 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f5\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\b0\f40\ulnone The proposed Santa Cruz-S\'8bo Pa
ulo pipeline is the latest attempt to solve the problem of access of the resources of Bolivia's Oriente to world markets. Both Brazil and Bolivia are countries where, for centuries, weak central governments sought to develop and manage large parts of the 
South American heartland with low population densities. Bolivia's defeats have been dramatic. It lost large slices of its original territory to its neighbors. Throughout its history, Bolivia has been plagued by problems of space, population density and co
mmunications, again and again threatening its survival as a national state. Its past role in the world economy might have promised some success in overcoming difficulties like these. In the 17th Century silver mining complex of Potos\'92
, Bolivia, harbored the biggest and richest export enclave of the preindustrial West and the largest urban concentration in the New World (120,000 population by 1610, against 200,000 for London around the same time). Mining at Potos\'92
 was supported by an extensive system of draft labor and food and materials supply, extending over much of what is now the north of Argentina and the highlands and valleys of Peru and Bolivia. Nevertheless, following collapse of the Potos\'92
 mining boom, internal communications had deteriorated so badly
 that a British diplomat reported in 1827: "the roads throughout Bolivia are only adapted for mules and llamas --a cart or carriage road does not exist in any part of the Republic, and with the exception of one or two carriages used in religious ceremonie
s at Chuquisaca (Sucre), a wheeled vehicle does not exist in any part of Bolivia."}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40 . J.B. Pentland, quoted in J. Valerie Fifer , }{\i\f40 Bolivia: Land Location and Politics since 1825.}{\f40  Cambridge University Press, 1972, p. 18.}}}{
\b0\f40\ulnone  Sim\'97n Bol\'92var, whose name the new republic bore, questioned its viability soon after it declared Independence in 1825: "Bolivia cannot remain as she is, because the R\'92
o de la Plata and the Emperor of Brazil would eventually bring about the destruction of that Republic."}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40 . J. Valerie Fifer, }{\i\f40 Bolivia: Land Location and Politics since 1825.}{\f40  Cambridge University Press, 1972 p16. }}}{\b0\f40\ulnone 
 Despite such catastrophic predictions, repeated many times, despite poverty and illiteracy and hundreds of episodes of political disorder, Bolivians developed
 a surprisingly strong sense of national cohesion and identity. In the absence of alternative opportunities, development of this cohesion and identity accelerated in the postwar decades, fed by migrations, racial mixing and large amounts of foreign aid in
 Bolivia's Oriente, the main source of gas supplies for the pipeline to S\'8b
o Paulo. The city of Santa Cruz has grown since 1950 at an astonishing rate, by nearly 7% yearly, to reach a 1992 population of 695,000, with migrants of highland Amerindian descent }{\b0\i\f40\ulnone (kollas) }{\b0\f40\ulnone 
now outnumbering native lowlanders }{\b0\i\f40\ulnone (kambas).}{\b0\f40\ulnone . 
\par This is a sudden awakening from stagnation. Since the 16th Century, bands of white men and }{\b0\i\f40\ulnone mestizos}{\b0\f40\ulnone 
  roamed the vast and trackless frontier east of the Andes to form isolated and often ephemeral settlements. Santa Cruz de la Sierra, at the western hub of the proposed pipeline, was founded by the Spanish conqueror \'84uflo de Ch\'87
vez in 1560, 200 miles east of its present location. The old site soon was abandoned because of Indian attacks. The town grew to 9
,000 population in 1825 and expanded slowly to reach 25,000 a century later and 41,000 by 1950. The region suffered big losses of population in the Chaco War. However, from the ashes of this conflict came the oil-for-railways agreements with Argentina and
 Brazil , a big step toward overcoming the historic problem of access. 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40 
A lack of exportable commodities impeded development of modern transport infrastructure (transcontinental railroads and highways) in the South American heartland until the late 20th Century.}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain 
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  For a discussion of these difficulties, see Norman Gall,  }{\i\f40 
Letter from Rondonia.  Part II: Strategic Reach.  }{\f40 AmericanUniversities Field Staff Reports, 1978. }}}{\f40 
 Brazil first proposed a railway from Santos on its Atlantic Coast to Arica (Chile) on the Pacific in 1871 in one of eight major transportation plans, involving creation of rail and canal links between major river systems, that were devised in the half-ce
ntury before World War I to deal with the diabolical problems of continental logistics.}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  Maps andsummaries of these plans are in Minist\'8erio de Transportes, }{\i\f40 Planos de Via\'8d\'8bo:  Evolu\'8d\'8bo  Hist\'97rica.  }{\f40 Bras\'92lia 1974. }}}{
\f40  While the United States completed its first transcontinental railway in 1869 and Russia its trans-Siberian railroad in 1902, construction of Brazil's rail link to
 the Pacific --joining the network serving Bolivia's Andean mines-- began only in 1905 and still is unfinished. 
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\tx7640\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 
The first breakthrough came in the rails-for-oil deals signed with Argentina and Brazil. The first agreement was signed with Argentina in 1922 and gradually was expanded in the 1930s and 1940s. Bolivia repaid Argentina's railway loans with oil, with movem
ent in both directions on a modest scale. Small quantities of Bolivian oil were sent through Argentina's Campo Dur\'87n pipeline to a refinery on the Paran\'87
 River. By 1967 only 30,000 tons of general cargo was being carried on the railway to Santa Cruz, increasing to 50,000 tons in the late 1960s as pipe and equipment were shipped northward to build the pipeline promoted by Gulf to send gas to Argen
tina. Bolivian Gulf  was nationalized in 1969 while the duct was under construction and replaced by YABOG, a subsidiary of YPFB, which delivered an average of 188 million cubic feet daily for the life of the contract (1972-91) for total billings of $4 bil
li
on. Gas sold by foreign companies working exploration blocks by 1991 became a majority of exports, flowing continuously despite hyperinflation  and political convulsions in both countries and despite large Argentine payments arrears. These arrears finally
 were settled in a Clean Slate }{\i\f40 (}{\f40  }{\i\f40 Borr\'97n  y Cuenta Nueva)  }{\f40 
agreement in 1989 by which Argentina's $310 million gas debt to Bolivia was swapped for $800 million in Bolivia's long-term debt to Argentina, with 18% of future payments going into a common public w
orks fund. Argentina no longer needed Bolivian gas and its arrears resumed shortly thereafter. 
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 
The importance of these previous export deals lies less in the scale of financial and gas flows than in the infrastructure and institutional practice developed,  helping to prepare Bolivia for the much larger project for a gas pipeline to Brazil. Earlier 
rails-for-oil deals between Brazil and Bolivia, beginning with the 1938 Robor\'8e accord, were much more ambitious in scope but were frustrated by the meager resour
ces that both parties could mobilize. The diplomacy of all four countries in the region --Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil and Paraguay-- was driven by strong geopolitical ambitions and fears. The Robor\'8e
 accord, signed a year after the Standard Oil nationalizat
ion, reserved large areas of the Bolivian Oriente for exploration by Brazil-Bolivian joint ventures that never went into action. The initial capital for exploration was Standard Oil's geological studies, provided by Bolivia, and a US$750,000 loan from Bra
zil, to be repaid in oil. Brazil then was struggling to explore, integrate and develop its own continental territory with meager financial and technological resources. At the inauguration in 1955 of the Corumb\'87
-Santa Cruz railway, Bolivian President Victor Paz Estenssoro argued in a memorandum to Brazilian President Jos\'8e Caf\'8e Filho:}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain 
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  Ra\'9cl Botelho Gos\'87lvez, }{\i\f40 Proceso del}{\f40  }{\i\f40 Imper
ialismo del Brasil: De Tordesillas a Robor\'8e. }{\f40  La Paz, 1960 p155.}}}{\f40  
\par }\pard \ql \li720\ri0\sl-260\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f40 
\par }\pard \ql \li720\ri0\sl260\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f40 
Those who negotiated the 1938 Treaties were ignorant of the petroleum industry and its needs. For this reason, since 1938 we maintain inactive an enormous wealth of liquid fuel
s....The prospective zone reserved in the 1938 Treaties and its complementary agreements is eight times greater than all areas assigned to YPFB. Nobody knows how much longer this enormous territory will remain unexplored if we stick to all the provisions 
of the 1938 Treaties. For Brazil, this is simply a theoretical guarantee that fails to fulfill the basic function of a guarantee for timely payment of  debt. 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f5\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\b0\f40\ulnone It would be dangerous for the proposed Santa Cruz-S
\'8bo Paulo pipeline project to follow the payment
 terms of the previous agreements. In the 1950s as in the 1980s, YPFB was a major propagator of public deficits and inflation, trading in its foreign accounts at the artificially low official exchange rate, instead of the more realistic parallel rate, som
e 20 to 50 times higher. According to Professor George Jackson Eder, the U.S. economic stabilization adviser to the Bolivian government in the 1950s: "Pipelines were purchased from Brazil at prices higher than they could be bought elsewhere, the cost bein
g 
disguised by the exchange rate and by arrangements for the purchase of Bolivian oil in 'treaty dollars' that could only be exchanged for Brazilian goods at exorbitant prices. As an example of unrealistic accounting, in 1955 YPFB bought 20 tank cars, worth
 over $15,000 each, and paid for them through the Central Bank at the boliviano equivalent of $675 each."}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  George Jackson Eder, }{\i\f40 Inflation and Development  in Latin America: A Case History of Inflation and stabilization in Bolivia.  }{\f40 
Ann Arbor: Michigan International Business Studies, No. 8, 1968/p60.}}}{\b0\f40\ulnone  As for the rails-oil deal with Argentina, Bolivian exports were "payable in treaty dollars so that this trade must be looked upon a subtraction from t
he nation's wealth rather than as a source of income."}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {
\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  Ibid. p506.}}}{\b0\f40\ulnone  These previous experiences led the present Bolivian government to press for and win provisions for payment in convertible dollars in its agreement with Brazil on the proposed gas pipeline. 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f5\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40\fs28\ulnone 3. Political Risks of the Santa Cruz-S\'8b
o Paulo Pipeline
\par }{\b0\f40\fs28\ulnone 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40 
 An international energy supply system, like the proposed pipeline to move natural gas to S\'8bo Paulo and other Brazilian cities from the reservoirs of eastern Bolivia, involves institutional relationships betw
een the participating nations and between different interests and groups within each country. Political risk to the proposed pipeline would be increased by reduction or elimination of foreign aid that sustains Bolivia's political integrity and its relatio
ns to the outside world. The new Clinton Administration in Washington is studying reductions in foreign aid to many countries, and especially to Bolivia in view of perceived failure of U.S.-aided efforts to reduce coca plantings for the international coca
ine trade. Bolivia's long-term stability depends upon developing economic viability in other areas. The Bolivia-Brazil gas pipeline is a key part of this effort.
\par It is important to contrast the political and physical infrastructure today with conditions earlier in this century. In 1918, Standard Oil engineers reckoned that the only way to market oil from Santa Cruz would be a pipeline to the Paraguay River, 500 mi
les away, and from there to barge the oil 700 miles downstream to Buenos Aires, at a capital cost of $12 million [$100 million in 1993 money]. By 1927, Standard's total Bolivian production averaged only 71 barrels daily,}{\cs16\super \chftn 
{\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  George Sweet Gibb and Evelyn Knowlton, }{\i\f40 
History of the Standard Oil Company (New Jersey): The Resurgent Years, 1911-27.  }{\f40 New York: Harper Bros. 1956/p382-3.}}}{\f40 
 but the company kept trying to overcome the problem of access, only to be entangled in a web of nationalisms and geopolitical rivalries that led Argentina to veto the export of Bolivian oil through its river ports.}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt 
\pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  George Philip, }{\i\f40 
Oil and Politics in Latin America: Nationalist Movements and State Com panies. }{\f40 Cambrige University Press, 1982/p194.}}}{\f40  The same entanglements led to nationalization of Standard's Bolivia operations after the Chaco War. 
\par By the 1990s, institutional relationships in the South American interi
or have been strengthened by dramatic improvements in communications. Not only were highways and railroads built, but radio stations and airstrips multiplied. Satellite links now tie remote parts of Bolivia into global networks of television and data tran
smission. The pipeline exporting gas to Argentina has operated continuously for two decades. Bolivian soybean planters recently established their own outlet to the Paraguay River to sell their output through Argentine ports. In the early 1980s a former Ne
w}{\i\f40  York Times  }{\f40 
reporter observed: "In recent years, all of Bolivia's endemic disadvantages --its landlocked borders, inaccessible interior, ingrained governmental corruption and long-standing tradition of contraband-- have quickly emerged as pillars of strength for the 
cocaine industry."}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  Jonathan Kandell, }{
\i\f40 Passage through El Dorado: Traveling te World's Last Wilderness. }{\f40 New York: Morrow, 1984/p232.}{\i\f40  }}}{\f40 
 The cocaine trade shows how better communications have strengthened eastern Bolivia's ties to the world economy. Under these changed conditions, what political risks would a Santa Cruz-S\'8bo Paulo gas pipeline project face in coming decades?
\par }{\b\f40\fs28 
\par Political and economic instability?}{\f40\fs28  
\par }{\f40 
There is some danger that the paralysis of political decisions in Brazil, now blocking the pipeline deal, may be followed by instability in Bolivia. The danger lies mainly in the continuing weakness of Bolivia's political institutions. Like politicians in
 other countries emerging from hyperinflation, Bolivia's leaders have learned caution in recent years. The main threat to stability would lie in the fiscal and welfare effects of any cut in flows of hard 
currency from foreign aid and the cocaine trade in the absence of new kinds of export growth. The outcome of the 1993 elections of a new President and Congress may indicate the capacity of Bolivia's institutions to deal with these contingencies.
\par }{\b\f40\fs28 
\par Terrorist acts?}{\f40 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f5\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\b0\f40\ulnone 
The world petroleum  industry gained broad experience with terrorist sabotage in recent decades. Its experience shows that, except when pumping stations and compressors become targets in open warfare, terrorist activity seldom stops pipeline flows f
or long. An outstanding example is the Venezuelan guerrilla insurgency of the 1960s, when high-volume pipelines were damaged frequently without causing major interruptions of oil exports. There are no signs on the horizon of this kind of belligerency in B
olivia. 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\b\f40 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f5\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40\fs28\ulnone Nationalization?
\par }{\b0\f40\ulnone The furies of Bolivian nationalism led to takeover by YPFB of the operations of Standard Oil in 1937 and Gulf in 1969. These two foreign companies discovered most of Bolivia's modest petroleum reserves until now. The rhetoric enve
loping these nationalizations portrayed foreign oil giants as siphoning away Bolivia's vast natural resources. By now, Bolivians see that these resources are not so vast and that financial and technical capacity of foreign companies are needed badly to su
stain domestic oil production, which has fallen from 40,000 barrels daily (BD) in 1975 to 24,000BD today and, according to  a U.S. Embassy report, "no major field discoveries appear to be in the offing."}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain 
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  Fernando Urquidi, }{\i\f40 Bolivian Petroleum Industry Development and Outlook: 1991.}{
\f40   La Paz: United States Embassy, April 1992/p12.}}}{\b0\f40\ulnone  The impact of falling crude oil production is compou
nded by big increases in consumption and by the politicization of YPFB's operations. Politicization led to overstaffing, building of uneconomic refineries, underpricing of fuels, frequent strikes and maintaining marginal fields to avoid creating local une
mployment. Technicians say that much of YPFB's production comes from marginal fields and installations that operate at a loss but cannot be shut down for political reasons. 
\par Expiration in May 1992 of the 20-year contract to export gas to Argentina, extended through 1993 at much lower prices, creates very powerful incentives to realize the Santa Cruz-S\'8b
o Paulo pipeline project as quickly as possible within a stable institutional framework. Given the structural problems in Bolivia's current accounts, only an 
extreme fury of self-destruction could rupture this framework. Under much less financial pressure, Bolivia fulfilled its commitments for gas deliveries to Argentina in exemplary fashion, with less than 48 hours of accumulated interruptions over 20-years, 
despite large arrears ($310 million)  in Argentine payments. Wrapped into this agreement was a World Bank loan and payments into a New York escrow account for compensation for the 1969 Gulf nationalization, which was completed by 1979.}{\cs16\super 
\chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  Comit\'8e
 Boliviano del Consejo Mundial de la Energia, }{\i\f40 Veinte A\'96os de Exportaci\'97n de Gas. }{\f40 La Paz, April 1992/p29-30.}}}{\b0\f40\ulnone 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f5\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40\fs28\ulnone Strikes?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40 
Bolivia has been plagued by strikes, for both political and economic motives, throughout the postwar decades. While future strikes cannot be excluded, the present political climate favors untrammeled operation of a Bolivia}{\b\f40 -}{\f40 
Brazil pipeline as a national priority. Presumably, a well-paid pipeline workforce in the private sector would not be eager to join political strikes. This contingency depends on the institutional environment in which the project takes place. 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f5\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40\fs28\ulnone 
\par Regional separatism?
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40 
Regional interests long have used the threat of separatism to extract rents from the central government in La Paz. Moreover, as in many rich and poor countries during the 1980s and 1990s, decentralization of government operations and revenues is taking pl
ace in Bolivia, embodied in a Decen
tralization Law now before Congress. The most effective agent of local interests has been the Santa Cruz Committee, which obtains from La Paz generous oil and gas royalties for regional development projects. Central governments long have been sensitive to
 regional claims because of previous territorial losses. These sensitivities led to the laying of telegraph lines in 1922 between La Paz and Santa Cruz and other towns of the Oriente, which did not prevent local revolts, including the seizure of public bu
il
dings in 1924 by revolutionaries in Santa Cruz, who declared Independence and decided to request annexation by either Brazil or Argentina before they were suppressed by 1,000 Bolivian troops sent from Cochabamba. After Bolivia's defeat in the Chaco War, m
any Paraguayans favored annexation of Santa Cruz Department.}{\cs16\super \chftn {\footnote\ftnalt \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs20\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {
\cs16\super \chftn }{\f40  J. Valerie Fifer, }{\i\f40 Bolivia: Land Location and Politics since 1825.}{\f40  Cambridge University Press, 1972 pp206&216. 
\par }}}{\f40  Bolivian diplomats pressed intensive postwar negotiations in Rio de Janeiro, Buenos Aires and Washington to avoid loss of oil-bearing territory. 
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 The threat of secession has receded in recent yea
rs because of ethnic mixing from migration and improved transportation and communications links between the Andes and the Oriente. In terms of political risk to the proposed Santa Cruz-S\'8b
o Paulo pipeline, a secessionist movement would favor the Bolivian regional interests most closely tied to Brazil. 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f5\fs24\ul\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40\fs28\ulnone 
\par 4. Final Strategic Considerations
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f12\fs24\lang1046\langfe1046\cgrid\langnp1046\langfenp1046 {\f40 
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 
Exports of large quantities of gas from Bolivia to Brazil is of great strategic interest to both countries. Negotiations are evolving in institutional conditions much more d
eveloped and promising than the predecessor "rails for oil" deals with Brazil and Argentina and the 20-year contract to export gas to Argentina. These three countries today have much more realistic ideas of their own potential and limitations, apart from 
Bolivia's desperate need to develop a new source of official export income. The new agreement would be backed by a degree of international financial, political and technological support lacking in the previous accords. All three countries have learned the
 h
ardships of living at the margin of international political and financial structures, which are lessons not to be forgotten quickly. These changed conditions offer strong incentives for successful execution for pipeline construction and scheduled gas deli
veries for the life of the contract. If today's political and institutional impasse in Brazil can be overcome, there is ample reason to expect that other conditions for successful operation will fall into place.
\par }\pard \ql \fi200\li0\ri0\sl480\slmult0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f40 
\par La Paz-S\'8bo Paulo, April 1993
\par }}